THE WELL OF ST. LUDGVAN  1

This well had nearly lost its reputation once--a Ludgvan woman was hanged, under the circumstances told in the following narrative:-- A small farmer, living in one of the most western districts of the county, died some years back of what was supposed at that time to be "English cholera."
A few weeks after his decease his wife married again.
This circumstance excited some attention in the neighbourhood.
It was remembered that the woman had lived on very bad terms with her late husband, that she had on many occasions exhibited strong symptoms of possessing a very vindictive temper, and that during the farmer's lifetime she had openly manifested rather more than a Platonic preference for the jnan whom she subsequently married.
Suspicion was generally excited; people began to doubt whether the first husband had died fairly.
At length the proper order was applied for, and his body was disinterred.
On examination, enough arsenic to have poisoned three men was found in the stomach.
The wife was accused of murdering her husband, was tried, convicted on the clearest evidence, and hanged.
Very shortly after she had suffered capital punishment horrible stories of a ghost were widely circulated.
Certain people declared that they had seen a ghastly- resemblance of the murderess, robed in her winding-sheet, with the black mark of the rope round her swollen neck, standing on stormy nights upon her husband's grave, and digging there with a spade, in hideous imitation of the actions of the men who had disinterred the corpse for medical examination.
This was fearful enough; nobody dared go near the place after nightfall.
But soon another circumstance was talked of in connection with the poisoner, which affected the tranquillity of people's minds in the village where she had lived, and where it was believed she had been born, more seriously than even the ghost story itself.
The well of St. Ludgvan, celebrated among the peasantry of the district for its one remarkable property, that every child baptised in its water (with which the church was duly supplied on christening occasions) was secure from ever being hanged.
No one doubted that all the babies fortunate enough to be born and baptised in the parish, though they might live to the age of Methuselah, and might during that period commit all the capital crimes recorded in the "Newgate Calendar," were still destined to keep quite clear of the summary jurisdiction of Jack Ketch.
No one doubted this until the story of the apparition of the murderess began to be spread abroad, then awful misgivings arose in the popular mind.
A woman who had been born close by the magical well, and who had therefore in all probability been baptised in its water, like her neighbours of the parish, had nevertheless been publicly and unquestionably hanged.
However, probability is not always the truth.
Every parishioner determined that the baptismal register of the poisoner should be sought for, and that it should be thus officially ascertained whether she had been christened with the well water or not.
After much trouble, the important document was discovered--not where it was first looked after, but in a neighbouring parish.
A mistake had been made about the woman's birthplace; she had not been baptised in St. Ludgvan church, and had therefore not been protected by the marvellous virtue of the local water.
Unutterable was the joy and triumph of this discovery.
The wonderful character of the parish well was wonderfully vindicated; its celebrity immediately spread wider than ever.
The peasantry of the neighbouring districts began to send for the renowned water before christenings; and many of them actually continue, to this day, to bring it corked up in bottles to their churches, and to beg particularly that it may be used whenever they present their children to be baptised.