THE TWO SERVING DAMSELS.  1

Some proposed "pinches, nips, and bobs," others to spoil her new cherry-coloured bonnet and ribands.
One talked of sending her the toothache, another of giving her a red nose; but this last was voted a too vindictive punishment for a pretty young woman.
So, tempering mercy with justice, the pixies were kind enough to let her off with a lame leg, which was so to continue only for seven years, and was alone to be cured by a certain herb, growing on Dartmoor, whose long and learned and very difficult name the elfin judge pronounced in a high and audible voice.
It was a name of seven syllables, seven being also the number of years decreed for the chastisement.
The good-natured maid, wishing to save her fellow-damsel so long a suffering, tried with might and main to bear in mind the name of this potent herb.
She said it over and over again, tied a knot in her garter at every syllable as a help to memory then very popular, and thought she had the word as sure as her own name, and very possibly felt much more anxious about retaining the one than the other.
At length she dropped asleep, and did not wake till the morning.
Now whether her head might be like a sieve, that lets out as fast as it takes in, or if the over-exertion to remember might cause her to forget, cannot be determined; but certain it is that when she opened her eyes she knew nothing at all about the matter, excepting that Molly was to go lame on her right leg for seven long years, unless a herb with a strange name could be got to cure her.
And lame she went for nearly the whole of that period.
At length (it was about the end of that time) a merry, squint-eyed, queer-looking boy started up one fine summer day, just as she went to pluck a mushroom, and came tumbling, head over heels, towards her.
He insisted on striking her leg with a plant which be held in his hand.
From that moment she got well, and lame Molly, as a reward for her patience in suffering, became the best dancer in the whole town at the celebrated festivities of Mayday on the green.