THE THREE SOLDIERS.
THERE was before a regiment in Dublin in Erin, and it was going a long journey.
There was a sergeant, a corporal, and a single soldier, who had sweethearts in the town.
They went to see them on the day that they were to go, and they stayed too long, and the regiment left them; they followed it, and they were going and going till the night came on them.
They saw a light a long way from them; and if it was a long way from them, it was not long they were in reaching it.
They went in, the floor was ready swept, and a fire on it, and no one in; they sat at the fire toasting themselves; they were not, long there when the single soldier rose, to whom was the name of John, to look what was in the chamber, because there was a light in it.
There was there a board covered with every sort of meat, and a lighted candle on it; he went up, he began to eat, and the rest began to hinder him, for that he had no business with it.
When they saw that he did not stop, they went up and they began themselves.
There were three beds in the chamber, and one of them went to lie in each bed; they had not laid long when three great red girls came in, and one of them stretched herself near each one of the beds; and when they saw the time fitting in the morning, they rose and went away.
When the girls rose, it could not be known that a bit had ever come off the board.
They sat and they took their meat.
The sergeant said that they had better follow the regiment; and John said that they should not follow it; as long as he could get meat and rest that he would not go.
When dinner time came they sat and they took their dinner.
The sergeant said they had better go; and John said that they should not go.
When supper time came they sat and they took their supper; after supping they went to lie down, each one to his own bed.
The girls came this night too, and went to lie down as before.
In the morning when they saw the time fitting, they rose and they went away.
When the lads rose the board was covered, and it could not be known that a bit had ever come off it.
They sat and they took their meat; and when they took their meat, the sergeant said that they would go at all events.
John said that they should not go.
They took their dinner and their supper as they used; they went to lie down; the girls came and they lay down after them.
In the morning the eldest gave the sergeant a purse, and every time he would unloose it, it would be full of gold and silver.
She said to the middle one, "What wilt thou give to thine?"
"I will give him a towel, and every time he spreads it it will be full of every sort of meat."
She gave the towel to the corporal; and she said to the youngest, "What wilt thou give to thine own?"
"I will give him a whistle, and every time he plays it he will be in the very middle of the regiment."
She gave him the whistle; they left their blessing with them, and they went away.
"I won't let it rest here," said John; "I will know who they are before