THE HISTORY OF THE CEABHARNACH.
ON the day when O'DONULL came out to hold right and justice, he saw a young chap coming.
His two shoulders were through his old SUAINAICHE (sleeping coat?)
his two ears through his old AIDE, hat, his two squat kick-er-ing tatter-y shoes full of cold roadway-ish water, three feet of his sword sideways on the side of his haunch, after the scabbard had ended.
He blest with easy true-wise maiden's words.
O'Donull blest him in the like of his own words.
O'Donull asked him what was his art?
"I could do harping," said the Ceabharnach.
"There are twelve men with me," said O'Donull, "and we will go to look on them."
"I am willing to do that," said the Ceabharnach.
When they went in O'Donull asked them to begin.
"Hast thou ever heard music, A Ceabharnach, finer than that?"
"I came past by the Isle of Cold, and I did not hear a screech in it that was more hideous than that."
"Wouldst thou play a harp thyself, Ceabharnach'?
said O'Donull.
"Here is her player, and who should not play!"
"Give him a harp," said O'Donull.
"Well canst thou play a harp," said O'Donull.
"It is not as thou pleasest but as I please myself, since I am at work."
The music of the Ceabharnach put every harper O'Donull had asleep.
"I will be taking fare thee well," said the Ceabharnach to O'Donull.
"Thou wilt not do that to me," said O'Donull, "thou must awaken my men."
"I am going to take a turn through Eirinn," said the Ceabharnach; "if I come the way they will see, and if I come not they will be thus with thee."
He left him, and he met with one herding.
"Thy master's harpers are asleep, and they will not wake till they are awakened.
Go thou and awaken them, and thou wilt get what will make a rich man of thee!"
"How shall I do that?"
asked the herd.
"Take a tuft of that grass and dip it in water, and shake it on them, and thou wilt awaken them."
He left the man, and he reached SEATHAN MOR MAC AN IARLE, great Seathan the son of the Earl, thirteen miles on the western side of Lumraig.
He saw a young chap coming; his two shoulders were through his old coat, his two ears through his old hat, his shoes full of cold roadway-ish water, three feet of his sword sideways on the side of his haunch after the scabbard was ended.
He asked him what was his trade?
He said that he could do juggling.
"I have jugglers myself; we will go to look on them."
"I am willing enough," said the Ceabharnach.
"Shew thy juggling," said the great Seathan, "till we see it."
He put three straws on the back of his fist and he blew them off it.
"If I should get half five marks," said one of the king's lads, "I would make better juggling than that."
"I will give thee that," said the Ceabharnach.
He put three straws on the back of his fist and the fist went along with the straws.
"Thou art sore, and thou wilt be sore," said his master; "my blessing on the hand that gave it to thee."
"I will do other juggles for thee," said the Ceabharnach.
He caught a hold of his own ear, and he gave a pull at it.
"If I could get half five marks," said another of the king's lads, "I would make a better juggle than that."
"I will give thee that," said the Ceabharnach.
He gave a pull at the ear and the head came away with the ear.
"I am going away," said the Ceabharnach.
"Thou wilt not leave my set of men so."
"I am for taking a turn through Eirinn.
If I come the way I will see them, and if I come not they will be so along with thee."
He went away, and he met with a man threshing in a barn.
He asked him if his work could keep him up.
"It was no more than it could do."
"I," said the Ceabharnach, "will make thee a free man for thy life.
There are two of thy master's lads, one with his fist off, and one with his head off.
Go there and put them on again, and thy master will make thee a free man for life."
"With what shall I bring them alive?"
"Take a tuft of grass, hold it in water, shake it on them, and thou wilt heal them."
He went away and he came to FEAR CHUIGEAMH MUGHA, 1 a nasty man that could not bear a man to go the way of his house, to look at him when he was taking his food.
There were twelve men with axes at the outer gate, and twelve men of swords on the inner gate; a porter at the great door.
They saw a young chap coming, his two shoulders through his old coat, his two ears through his old hat, his two squat kick-ering tatter-y shoes full of cold roadway-ish water.
He asked their license in to see Fear Chuigeamh Mugha.
One of them raised his axe to drive his head off, but so it was that he struck it on his own comrade.
They arose on each other till they killed each other; and he came to the men of the sword, one raised his sword to strike off his head, but he cut the head off his comrade with it, and they all fell to slaying each other.
He reached the porter; he caught him by the small of the legs, and he struck his head on the door.
He reached the great man as he sat at his dinner; he stood at the end of the board.
"Oh evil man," said the king, "great was thy loss before thou camest here," as he rose to catch hold of his sword to strike his head off.
His hand stuck to the sword, and his seat stuck to the chair, and he could not rise; no more could his wife leave her own place.
When he had done all he wished he went away, and he met a poor man that was travelling the world.
"If thou wilt take my advice," said the Ceabharnach,