Cuculin
THERE was a king in a land not far from Greece who had two daughters, and the younger was fairer than the elder daughter. This old king made a match between the king of Greece and his own elder daughter; but he kept the younger one hidden away till after the marriage. Then the younger daughter came forth to view; and when the king of Greece saw her, he wouldn't look at his own wife. Nothing would do him but to get the younger sister and leave the elder at home with her father. The king wouldn't listen to this, wouldn't agree to the change, so the king of Greece left his wife where she was, went home alone in a terrible rage and collected all his forces to march against the kingdom of his father-in-law. He soon conquered the king and his army and, so far as he was able, he vexed and tormented him. To do this the more completely, he took from him a rod of Druidic spells, enchantment, and ring of youth which he had, and, striking the elder sister with the rod, he said: "You will be a serpent of the sea and live outside there in the bay by the castle." Then turning to the younger sister, whose name was Gil an Og, he struck her, and said: " You 'II be a cat while inside this castle, and have your own form only when you are outside the walls." After he had done this, the king of Greece went home to his own country, taking with him the rod of enchantment and the ring of youth. The king died in misery and grief, leaving his two daughters spellbound. Now there was a Druid in that kingdom, and the younger sister went to consult him, and asked: "Shall I ever be released from the enchantment that's on me now?" "You will not, unless you find the man to release you; and there is no man in the world to do that but a champion who is now with Fin MacCumhail in Erin." "Well, how can I find that man?" asked she. "I will tell you," said the Druid. " Do you make a shirt out of your own hair, take it with you; and never stop till you land in Erin and find Fin and his men; the man that the shirt will fit is the man who will release you." She began to make the shirt and worked without stopping till it was finished. Then she went on her journey and never rested till she came to Erin in a ship. She went on shore and inquired where Fin and his men were to be found at that time of the year. "You will find them at Knock an Ar," was the answer she got. She went to Knock an Ar carrying the shirt with her. The first man she met was Conan Maol, and she said to him: "I have come to find the man this shirt will fit. From the time one man tries it all must try till I see the man it fits." The shirt went from hand to hand till Cuculin put it on. " VVell," said she, "it fits as your own skin." Now Gil an Og told Cuc Now Gil an Og and Cuc "You'll have no one but a cat for company tonight," said Gil an Og. "I have the form of a cat inside this castle, but outside I have my own appearance. Your dinner is ready, go in." After the dinner Cuc When he rose up, a basin of water, and everything he needed was before him, and his breakfast ready. He walked out after breakfast; Gil an Og was on the green outside before him and said: "If you are not willing to free my sister and my-self, I shall not urge you; but if you do free us, I shall be glad and thankful. Many king's sons and champions before you have gone to recover the ring and the rod; but they have never come back." "Well, whether I thrive or not, I'll venture," said Cuc "I will give you," said Gil an Og, "a present such as I have never given before to any man who ventured out on my behalf; I will give you the speckled boat." Cuc The king of Greece gathered his forces and sent them out to chastise Cuc "I have no one now to fight but myself," said the king; " and I don't think it becomes me to go out and meet the like of you." If you don't come out to me," said Cuc "That's enough of impudence from you, you scoundrel," said the king of Greece "I won't have you come into my castle, but I'II meet you on the open plain." The king went out, and they fought till Cuc "Well, I did carry them away," said the king, "but it wouldn't be easy for me now to give them to you or to her; for there was a man who came and carried them away, who could take them from you and from me, and from as many more of us, if they were here." "Who was that man?" asked Cuc They set out next day, and never stopped till they came opposite Lug Longhand castle, and Cuc "I have no forces," said Lug, " but I'll fight you myself." So the combat began, and they spent the whole day at one another, and neither gained the victory. The king of Greece himself put up a tent on the green in front of the castle, and prepared everything necessary to eat and drink (there was no one else to do it). After breakfast next day, Cuc They fought the whole day till near evening, when Cuc "Oh, then," said Lug, "it would be hard for me to give them to you or to him; for forces came and took them from me; and they would have taken them from you and from him, if you had been here." "Who in the world took them from you?" asked the king of Greece. "Release me from this bond, and come to my castle, and I 'II tell you the whole story," said Lug Longhand. Cuc The king of Greece, Cuc As soon as Cuc When Cuculin saw him, he threw aside his weapons, caught him, raised him above his head, hurled him down on the flat of his back, bound him head and heels, and said: "I'll cut the head off you unless you give me the ring and the rod that you carried away from Lug Longhand." "I took them from him, it's true," said the knight; " but it would be hard for me to give them to you now; for a man came and took them from me, who would have taken them from you and all that are with you, and as many more if they had been here before him." "Who in the world could that man be?" asked Cuc "The dark Gruagach of the Northern Island. Release me, and come to my castle. I'll tell you all and entertain you well." He took them to his castle, gave them good cheer, and told them all about the Gruagach and his island. Next morning all sailed away in Cuc Then Cuc Next day after breakfast Cuc "I took them from him, 't is true; but there was a man named Thin-in-Iron, who took them from me, and he would have taken them from you and from me, and all that are here, if there were twice as many. He is such a man that sword cannot cut him, fire cannot burn him, water cannot drown him, and 't is no easy thing to get the better of him. But if you 'II free me now and come to my castle, I'll treat you well and tell you all about him." Cuc Next morning they would not stop nor be satisfied till they went their way. They found the castle of Thin-in-Iron, and Cuc "It is time now to stop till to-morrow." Cuc "Well," said Cuc When it was time for rest, Gil an Og went away, and Cuc They prepared breakfast, and after breakfast Cuc Thin-in-Iron thrust his head out and said: "That man I fought yesterday has come again to-day. It would have been a good deed if I had cut the head off him last night. Then he wouldn't be here to trouble me this morning. I won't come home this day till I bring his head with me. Then I'll have peace." They met in combat and fought till the night was coming. Then Thin-in-Iron cried out for a cessation, and if he did, Cuc Cuc "Whoever came and healed him yesterday, may be the same will be here to-night." They went away and were not long gone when Gil an Og came and said: "Cuc "Oh, then," said Cuc "Well," said she, " you are a stronger man than he, but there is no good in working at him with a sword. Throw your sword aside to-morrow, and you'll get the better of him and bind him. You'll not see me again." She went away and he fell asleep. His comrades came in the morning and found him sleeping. They got breakfast, and, after eating, Cuc "Oh, 't is the same man as yesterday," said Thin-in-Iron, " and if I had cut the head off him then, it wouldn't be he that would trouble me to-day. If I live for it, I'll bring his head in my hand to-night, and he'll never disturb me again." When Cuc "What do you want of me?" asked Thin-in-Iron. "I want the rod of enchantment and the ring of youth you carried from the Gruagach." "I did indeed carry them from him, but it would be no easy thing for me to give them to you or any other man; for a force came which took them from me." "What could take them from you?" asked Cuc "The queen of the Wilderness, an old hag that has them now. But release me from this bondage and I'll take you to my castle and entertain you well, and I'll go with you and the rest of the company to see how will you thrive." So he took Cuc "The old hag, the queen of the Wilderness, lives in a round tower, which is always turning on wheels. There is but one entrance to the tower, and that high above the ground, and in the one chamber in which she lives, keeping the ring and the rod, is a chair, and she has but to sit on the chair and wish herself in any part of the world, and that moment she is there. She has six lines of guards protecting her tower, and if you pass all of these, you'll do what no man before you has done to this day. The first guards are two lions that rush out to know which of them will get the first bite out of the throat of any one that tries to pass. The second are seven men with iron hurlies and an iron ball, and with their hurlies they wallop the life out of any man that goes their way. The third is Hung-up-Naked, who hangs on a tree with his toes to the earth, his head cut from his shoulders and lying on the ground, and who kills every man who comes near him. The fourth is the bull of the Mist that darkens the woods for seven miles around, and destroys everything that enters the Mist. The fifth are seven cats with poison tails and one drop of their poison would kill the strongest man. Next morning all went with Cuc Cuc Cuc The first one said: " Give him a touch of the hurly and let the others do the same; and we'll wallop him till he is dead." Now Cuc He went on his way till he came to Hung-up-Naked, who was hanging from a tree, his head on the ground near him. The queen of the Wilderness had fastened him to the tree because he wouldn't marry her; and she said: " If any man comes who will put your head on you, you 'II be free." And she laid the injunction on him to kill every man who tried to pass his way without putting the head on him. Cuc "Well, I'm not going to fight with a man unless he has a head on him. Take your head." And Cuc The man said: "I'm all right now. I know where you are going. I'll stay here till you come; if you conquer you'II not forget me. Take the head off me now; put it where you found it; and if you succeed, remember that I shall be here before you on your way home." Cuc "Well," said Cuc He walked away and stood awhile and looked. " 'T is hard to say," said he, " that any good champion would leave his sword behind him." So he went back and made another pull and took the hilt off his sword, leaving the blade in the back of the bull. Then he went away tattered and torn, the hilt in his hand, and he turned up towards the forge of the Strong Smith. One of the Smith's boys was out for coal at the time: he saw Cuc "Hold your tongue! " said the master. " Have you heard any account of the bull of the Mist these three days?" "We have not," said the boys. "Perhaps," said the Strong Smith, " that's a good champion that's coming, and do you mind yourselves." At that moment Cuc "We can," said the master. They put in the blade, Cuc "'This is a rotten blade," said he. " Go at it again." They made a second blade. The boys were in dread of him now. He broke the second blade in the same way as the first. They made six blades, one stronger than the other. He did the same to them all. "There is no use in talking," said the Strong Smith They went and brought up the sword on two hand-spikes between them; it was so heavy that one couldn't carry it. They gave it to Cuc "This is my sword, whoever made it," said he. "It is," said the master; "it's yours and welcome. I know who you are now, and where you are going. Remember that I'm in bondage here." The Strong Smith took Cuc Cuc Now he faced the tower turning on wheels. The queen of the Wilderness was in it. He had been told by Thin-in-Iron that he must cut the axle. He found the axle, cut it, and the tower stopped that instant. Cuc The old hag was preparing to sit on the chair as she saw him coming. He sprang forward, pushed the chair away with one hand, and, catching her by the back of the neck with the other, said: " You are to lose your head now, old woman!" "Spare me, and what you want you'll get," said she. "I have the ring of youth and the rod of enchantment," and she gave them to him. He put the ring on his finger, and saying, " You 'II never do mischief again to man! " he turned her face to the entrance, and gave her a kick. Out she flew through the opening and down to the ground, where she broke her neck and died on the spot. Cuc Cuc Cuc When she entered the castle and took the form of a cat, he struck her a blow of the rod and she gained the same form and face she had before the king of Greece struck her. Then he asked, "Where is your sister?" In the lake there outside," answered Gil an Og, in the form of a sea-serpent. 'She went out with him, and the moment they came to the edge of the lake the sister rose up near them. Then Cuc Next day they saw a deal of vessels facing the harbor, and what should they be but a fleet of ships, and on the ships were the king of Greece, Lug Longhand, the knight of the island of the Flood, the Dark Gr Cuc When Cuc "I would," said he, "if I knew who my father is." "His name is Cuc Conl When the young man came up Fin said, "There is a single man facing us." Conan Maol said, "Let some one go against him, ask who he is and what he wants." "I never give an account of myself to any man, said Conl "There is no man among us," said Conan, "bound in that way but Cuc They were at one another three days and three nights. The son always sparing the father, the father never sparing the son. Conan Maol came to them the fourth morning. Cuc When Conl "Are you my son?" said Cuc "I am," said Conl Cuc "There's trouble on Cuc "Chew your thumb," said Conan Maol, "to know what's on him." Fin chewed his thumb, and said, " Cuc "Go now," said Conan, "and bind him to go down to Bale strand and give seven days fighting against the waves of the sea, rather than kill us all." So Fin bound him to go down When he went to Bale strand Cuc 