Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends: The Higgledy-Piggledy Palace
Sarah, the wife of the patriarch Abraham, and the great mother of the Jewish people, was the most beautiful woman who ever lived.
Everybody who saw her marveled at the dazzling radiance of her countenance; they stood spellbound before the glorious light that shone in her eyes and the wondrous clearness of her complexion.
This greatly troubled Abraham when he fled from Canaan to Egypt.
It was disconcerting to have crowds of travelers gazing at his wife as if she were something more than human.
Besides, he feared that the Egyptians would seize Sarah for the king's harem.
So, after much meditation, he concealed his wife in a big box.
When he arrived at the Egyptian frontier, the customs officials asked him what it contained.
"Barley," he replied.
"You say that because the duty on barley is the lowest," they said.
"The box must surely be packed with wheat."
    "I will pay the duty on wheat," said Abraham, who was most anxious they should not open the box.
The officials were surprised, for, as a rule, people endeavored to avoid paying the duties.
"If you are so ready to pay the higher tax," they said, "the box must contain something of greater value.
Perhaps it contains spices."
Abraham intimated his readiness to pay the duty on spices.
"Oh, Oh!"
laughed the officers.
"Here is a strange person ready to pay heavy dues.
He must be anxious to conceal something--gold, perchance."
"I will pay the duty on gold," said Abraham, quietly.
The officers were now completely bewildered.
"Our highest duty," said their chief, "is on precious stones, and since you decline to open the box, we must demand the tax on the costliest gems."
"I will pay it," said Abraham, simply.
The officers could not understand this at all, and after consulting among themselves, they decided that the box must be opened.
"It may contain something highly dangerous," they argued.
Abraham protested, but he was arrested by the guards and the box forced open.
When Sarah was revealed, the officials stepped back in amazement and admiration.
"Indeed, a rare jewel," said the chief.
It was immediately decided to send Sarah to the king.
When Pharaoh beheld her, he was enraptured.
She was simply dressed in the garments of a peasant woman, with no adornment and no jewels, and yet the king thought he had never seen a woman so entrancingly beautiful.
When he saw Abraham, however, his brow clouded.
"Who is this man?"
he demanded of Sarah.
Fearing that he might be imprisoned, or even put to death if she acknowledged him as her husband, Sarah replied that he was her brother.
Pharaoh felt relieved.
He smiled on Abraham and greeted him pleasantly.
"Thy sister is exceeding fair to gaze upon," he said, "and comely of form.
She hath bewitched me by her matchless charm.
She shall become the favorite of my harem.
I will recompense thee well for thy loss of her.
Thou shalt be loaded with gifts."
Abraham was too wise to betray the anger that surged in his heart.
"Courage, my beloved," he whispered to Sarah.
"The good God will not forsake us."
He made pretense of agreeing to Pharaoh's suggestion, and the chief steward of the king gave him an abundant store of gold and silver and jewels, also sheep and oxen and camels.
Abraham was conducted to a beautiful palace, where many slaves attended him and bowed before him, for one on whom the monarch had showered favors was a great man in the land of Pharaoh.
Left alone, Abraham began to pray most devoutly.
Meanwhile, Sarah was led into a gorgeous apartment where the queen's own attendants were ordered to array her in the richest of the royal garments.
Then she was brought before Pharaoh who dismissed all the attendants.
"I desire to be alone with thee," said the king to Sarah.
"I have much to say to thee, and I long to feast my eyes on those features of beauty rare."
But Sarah shrank from him.
To her, he appeared ugly and loathsome.
His smile was a vicious leer, and his voice sounded like a harsh croak.
"Fear not," he said, trying to speak tenderly and kindly.
"I will do thee no harm.
Nay,