Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends: Abi Fressah's Feast
There was not in the whole city of Bagdad a greedier man than Abi Fressah, and you may be sure he was not popular.
It was not that he was rich and refused to give heed to the needs of the poor.
He was, in truth, a merchant in moderately affluent circumstances, and he did not withhold charity from the deserving; but he was a man of enormous appetite and did not scruple to descend to trickery to secure an invitation to a meal.
So skilful, indeed, did he become in wheedling these favors from his friends and from those with whom he traded, that he devoted the major portion of each day to feeding and left himself little time to attend to his business affairs.
Moreover, he grew unpleasantly fat.
His face was red and bloated with much wine drinking.
He was not a nice person to look upon at all, and those who had aforetime been his friends came to the conclusion that the day had arrived when he should be taught a severe lesson.
And so it came to pass that when Abi Fressah was standing in the bazaar at the hour of the mid-day meal and eagerly scanning the crowd to discover some acquaintance whom he could induce to ask him to dinner, he saw Ben Maslia, one of the wealthiest and most generous of men in Bagdad.
"Ah, my excellent friend," Abi cried, warmly greeting Ben Maslia, "’tis almost an eternity since nay unworthy eyes were cast upon thy pleasant countenance.
Peace be on thee and thine unto the end of days."
"Also to thee," returned Ben Maslia.
"And whence comest thou?
And whither goest thou, oh most hospitable friend?"
Abi Fressah asked these questions hastily, his beady eyes searching the other's face hungrily for a sign upon which he could seize to invite himself to a meal.
"It is the hour of the mid-day meal.
Goest thou, perchance, to thy pious home?"
"Thither go I," said Ben Maslia.
"My path lies in the same direction," said Abi Fressah.
"It will be pleasant to walk together.
Come," and he grasped Ben Maslia by the arm.
"It is kind of thee, friend Abi Fressah," rejoined the other, "but I have built me a new abode on the other side of the city."
Abi Fressah's face fell for a moment, but he was clever enough to take advantage of the news.
"A new dwelling erected by the wealthy Ben Maslia," he said, winningly, "must be a building of magnificence, worth seeing."
"Indeed it is as thou sayest," cried the other enthusiastically, and forthwith he launched into a lavish description of his residence.
Abi Fressah grew impatient when Ben Maslia began to describe each room in detail, his hunger increased when, in glowing words, his friend painted the gorgeous dining-room, and his mouth watered at the information that the cellars were stocked with a thousand bottles of wine.
"Blessings on thee and thy wine-cellar and thy house," murmured Abi Fressah, when he could get in a word.
"I have no business of consequence to transact this afternoon.
I could not pay thee a better compliment than to spend it examining thy treasures."
"Of a certainty thou couldst not," assented the other, to his great glee.
"Then let us proceed," said Abi Fressah.
So they set out, Ben Maslia still continuing his glowing account of his wonderful house.
"It must be as spacious as a palace," put in Abi Fressah.
"Thou speakest truth," agreed Ben Maslia.
"I will illustrate to thee the vast expanse of my new residence."
He stopped in his walk, measured one hundred paces in the street, and intimated that this represented the width of the central courtyard.
Abi Fressah was overwhelmed with surprise, but he was growing momentarily hungrier, and it was with difficulty he could restrain his impatience.
"Yes, yes," he said, "I would fain gaze upon the outer door of thy dwelling."
"Such an outer door," said Ben Maslia, "hast thou never seen.
Its width.
.
."
and again he began to measure the street to indicate its dimensions.
"And further," he added, calmly, either failing to notice, or deliberately overlooking Abi Fressah's growing distress, "its shape and design are .
.
.!"
and he dragged the other through several streets until he found a door to which he could point as being not altogether unlike his own.
"But I weary thee," he said, suddenly, as if regretful of the time he had wasted.
"Nay, nay, not at all," Abi Fressah assured him, although he was inwardly fuming at the delay.