Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter II. Roumanian-Gypsy Stories: No. 15.--The Prince and the Wizard
There was a king, and he had an only son.
Now, that lad was heroic, nought-heeding.
And he set out in quest of heroic achievements.
And he went a long time nought-heeding.
And he came to a forest, and lay down to sleep in the shadow of a tree, and slept.
Then he saw a dream, that he arises and goes to the hill where the dragon's horses are, and that if you 1 keep straight on you will come to the man with no kidneys, screaming and roaring.
So he arose and departed, and came to the man with no kidneys.
And when he came there, he asked him, 'Mercy!
what are you screaming for?'
p. 63He said, 'Why, a wizard has taken my kidneys, and has left me here in the road as you see me.
'Then the lad said to him, 'Wait a bit longer till I return from somewhere.
'And he left him, and journeyed three more days and three nights.
And he came to that hill, and sat down, and ate, and rested.
And he arose and went to the hill.
And the horses, when they saw him, ran to eat him.
And the lad said, 'Do not eat me, for I will give you pearly hay 1 and fresh water.
'Then the horses said, 'Be our master.
But see you do as you've promised.
'The lad said, 'Horses, if I don't, why, eat me and slay me.
'So he took them and departed with them home.
And he put them in the stable, and gave them fresh water and pearly hay.
And he mounted the smallest horse, and set out for the man with no kidneys, and found him there.
And he asked him what was the name of the wizard who had taken his kidneys.
'What his name is I know not, but I do know where he is gone to.
He is gone to the other world.
'Then the lad took and went a long time nought-heeding, and came to the edge of the earth, and let himself down, and came to the other world.
And he went to the wizard's there, and said, 'Come forth, O wizard, that I may see the sort of man you are.
'So when the wizard heard, he came forth to eat him and slay him.
Then the lad took his heroic club and his sabre; and the instant he hurled his club, the wizard's hands were bound behind his back.
And the lad said to him, 'Here, you wizard, tell quick, my brother's kidneys, or I slay thee this very hour.
'And the wizard said, 'They are there in a jar.
Go and get them.
'And the lad said, 'And when I've got them, what am I to do with them?
'The wizard said, 'Why, when you've got them, put them in water and give him them to drink.
'Then the lad went and took them, and departed to him.
p. 64