Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter III. Bukowina-Gypsy Stories: No. 27.--Tropsyn
There was a poor man, and he had four sons.
And they went out to service, and went to a gentleman to thrash wheat.
And they received so much wheat for a wage, and brought it to their father.
'Here, father, eat; we will go out to service again.'
And they went again to a gentleman, who was to.
give them each a horse at the year's end.
And the youngest was called Tropsyn; and the gentleman made him his groom.
And a mare brought forth a colt; and that colt said, 'Tropsyn, take me.
The year is up now.
'The gentleman said, 'Choose your horses.
'So the three elder brothers chose good horses; but Tropsyn said, 'Give me this horse, master.
''What will you do with it?
it's so little.
''So it may be.
'Tropsyn took it and departed; and the colt said, 'Let me go, Tropsyn, to my dam to suck.
'And he let it go, and it went to its dam, and came back a horse to terrify the world.
'Now mount me.
'He mounted, and the horse flew.
He caught up his brothers, and his brothers asked him, 'Where did you get that horse from?
''I killed a gentleman, and took his horse.
''Let's push on, and escape.
'Night fell upon them as they were passing a meadow, and in that meadow they saw the light of a fire.
They made for the light.
It was an old woman's, and she was a witch, and had four daughters.
And they went there, and went into the house; and Tropsyn said, 'Good-night.
''Thank you.
''Can you give us a night's lodging?
''I'm not sure; my mother is not at home.
When she comes you had better ask her.
'The mother came home.
'What are you wanting, young fellows?'p.
105'We've come to demand your daughters in marriage.''Good.
'She made them a bed on the ground with its head to the threshold, and her daughters' with its head to the wall.
And the old woman sharpened her sword to cut off their heads.
And Tropsyn took his brothers' caps, and put them on the girls' heads.
And the old woman arose, and kept feeling the caps, and keeps cutting off the heads, and killed her daughters.Tropsyn arose, and led his brothers outside.
'Come, be off.'
And he arose, Tropsyn; and the old woman had a golden bird in a cage; and Tropsyn said to the horse, 'I will take a feather of the bird.
'And the horse said, 'Don't.''Bah!
I will.'
And he took a feather, and put it in his pocket.And they mounted their horses and rode away, and went to a city.
There was a great lord, a count; and he asked them, 'Where are you going?
''We are going to service.
''Take service with me, then.
'And that lord was still unmarried.
And they went to him, and he gave them each a place.
One he set over the horses, and one he set over the oxen, and one he set over the swine; and Tropsyn he made coachman.
Of a night Tropsyn stuck the feather in the wall, and it shone like a candle.
And his brothers were angry, and went to their master.
'Master, Tropsyn has a feather, such that one needs no candle--of gold.
'The master called: 'Tropsyn, come here, bring me the feather.
'Tropsyn brought it, and gave it to his master.
The master liked him better than ever, and the brothers went to the master, and said to him, 'Master, Tropsyn has said that he'll bring the bird alive.
'The master called Tropsyn.
'Tropsyn, bring me the bird.
If you don't, I shall cut off your head.
'He went to his horse.
'What am I to do, horse, for the master has told me to bring the bird?
''Fear not, Tropsyn; jump on my back.
'So he mounted the horse, and rode to the old woman's.p.
106