Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter V. Slovak, Moravian, and Bohemian Gypsy Stories: No. 43.--The Princess and the Forester's Son
Somewhere or other there lived a forester.
He ill-used his wife and his children, and often got drunk.
Then the mother said, 'My children, the father is always beating us, so we'll get our things together and leave him.
We will wander out into the world, whither our eyes lead us.
'They took their things, and followed the road through a great forest.
They journeyed two days and two nights without reaching any place, so the eldest son said to his mother, 'Mother, dear, night has come on us, let us sleep here.
''My children,' said the mother, 'pluck moss, make a resting-place, and we will lie down here to sleep.
'The elder son said to his brother, 'Go for wood.
'They made a fire, and seated themselves by it.Then said the elder son to his brother, 'Now, you must keep watch, for there are wild beasts about, so that we bep.
145not devoured.
Do you sleep first; then you'll get up, I lie down to sleep, then you will watch again.
'So the younger brother lay down near his mother to sleep; the elder kept watch with his gun.
Then he thought within himself, and said, 'Great God!
wherever are we in these great forests?
Surely we soon must perish.'
He climbed up a high tree, and looked all round, till a light flashed in his eyes.
When he saw the light, he took his hat from his head, and let it drop.
1 Then he climbed down, and looked to see if his mother was all right.
From the spot where his hat lay he walked straight forward for a good distance, a whole half hour.
Then he observed a fire.
Who were there but four-and-twenty robbers, cooking and drinking?
He went through the wood, keeping out of their sight, and loaded his gun; and, just as one of them was taking a drink of wine, he shot the jug right from his lips, so that only the handle was left in his hand.
And his gun was so constructed that it made no report.Then the robber said to his comrade, 'Comrade, why won't you let me alone, but knock the jug out of my mouth?'
You fool, I never touched you.
'He took a pull out of another jug, and the lad loaded again.
He sat on a tree, and again shot the jug--shot it away from his mouth, so that the handle remained in his hand.Then the first robber said, 'Will you leave me alone, else I'll pay you out with this knife?
'But his comrade stepped up to him, looking just like a fool; at last he said, 'My good fellow, I am not touching you.
See, it is twice that has happened; maybe it is some one in the forest.
Take your gun, and let's go and look if there is not some one there.
'They went and they hunted, searched every tree, and found him, the forester's son, sitting on a tree at the very top.
They said to him, 'You earth-devil, come down.
If you won't, we'll shoot at you till you fall down from the tree.
'But he would not come.
Again they ordered him.
What p. 146was the poor fellow to do?
He had to come.
When he was down, they each seized him by an arm, and he thought to himself, 'Things look bad with me.
I shall never see my mother and brother again.
They'll either kill me, or tie me up to a tree.
'They brought him to the fire and asked him, 'What are you?--are you a craftsman?
''I am one of your trade.
''If you are of our trade, eat, drink, and smoke as much as your heart desires.
'When he had eaten and drunk, they said, 'Since you are such a clever chap, and such a good shot, there is a castle with a princess in it, whom we went after, but could not come at her anyhow, this princess.
Maybe, as you are so smart, there's a big dog yonder that made us run, but as you are such a good shot, and your gun makes no report, you'll kill this dog, and then we'll make you our captain.
'Then they broke up camp, took something to eat and to drink, and came to the castle.
When they reached the castle the dog made a great noise.
They lifted him up, the forester's son; he aimed his gun, and, as the dog sprang at him, he fired and hit him.
The dog made ten more paces, and fell to the earth.
As he fell, the lad said to the robbers, 'Comrades, the dog is dead.
''Brave fellow,' said they, 'now you shall be our captain, for killing the dog; but one thing more you must do.
We will make a hole for you in the wall.
When we have done that, then--you are so slender--you will creep through the hole.
' 1They made the hole, and he crept through it.
Then the robbers said to him, 'Here you, you have to go up a flight of steps, and at the fourth flight you will come to a door.
There is one door, two doors, three doors.
'So through each door he passed; then he passed through the third, there were a quantity of swords.
He saw they were very fine swords, and took one of them.
Then he went to the fourth, opened it slowly; it did not stop him, for the p. 147keys were there.
Through the keyhole he saw a bed.
Then he opened it, and went in.
There he saw a princess lying, quite naked, but 1 covered with a cloth of gold.
At her feet stood a table, on which lay a pair of golden scissors.
There were golden clasps, and there were two rings, and her name was engraved inside one of them.
And when he sees her sleeping thus, he thought, 'O great God, what if I were to lie down beside her!
Do, my God, as thou wilt.'
So he took the scissors, and cut off half the cloth of gold, and lay down beside her; and she could not awake.
Then he arose, and took to himself the half of the coverlet and one of the rings and one of her slippers, and went out, taking the sword with him, and shutting the door.
As he passed through the fourth door he said to himself, 'I must open it carefully, so as not to waken her mother and father.'
He got out safely, then he went through the courtyard to the robbers.
When he reached the hole he said to them, 'My dear men, I know where she is.
Come, we'll soon have the princess, but you must creep through the hole one after the other.'
Then he drew his sword, and, as one came through after the other, he seized him by the head, cut off his head, and cast him aside.
When he had done so to the twenty-fourth, he cast away the sword, and returned by the way that he had come to his mother, where they had slept.
(He had thought never again to see his mother and his brother.)
When he came to his mother, he said, 'Mother, how do you find yourself?
you must be sleepy.
'His mother asked him, 'My dear son, how have you managed to do with so little sleep?
'His younger brother said, 'Why didn't you wake me up?'
You were so sleepy, I let you sleep.
'Then they made a fire, ate and drank, and wandered on again through the forest.
They arrived in a town, and sought employment.
The mother said to her eldest son, 'My son, we will stay at least a year here.'
She fortunately got a place at a big house as cook, and the two lads went as servants to an innkeeper.
When they had been a year there, the mother said to her two sons, 'Just see how well off we were at home, and here we have to work, and I an old body.
p. 148