Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter VIII. Welsh-Gypsy Stories: No. 57.--Ashypelt
p. 235 Once there was an old man and an old ’ooman livin' in the Forest o’ Dean.
They ’ad twelve sons, and there was one son called Ashypelt.
He was the youngest son, and they didn't never think but very little o’ Ashypelt, as ’ee was allus used to be i’ the esshole under the fire, an’ the brothers used to spit on ’im and laugh at ’im an’ make fun of ’im an’ that.
He never spoke, didn't Ashypelt, nor hear nuthin’.
These eleven brothers--they was nearly allus felling timber and that--used to go, they used to go off tel Saturdays for a week.
They used to do that very reglar, and were bringing a lot of money in for the old man and the old ’ooman.So the old ’ooman sez one day, 'Well, John, I sez, I think you an’ me ’as got enough money now to live on which will keep we all the days of our life.
An’ we'll tell ’em to-night'--it was on a Saturday, an’ they was comin’ home again, they was comin' home with all the week's wages--'we'll say to ’em as the pressgang ’as been after ’em, as they've got to ’ear as we've got eleven very fine sons, and they wants to make soldiers of ’em.
So I'll begin a-cryin’ when they comes ’ere to-night, and I'll say to ’em, "O my very dear sons, the pressgang's been after yous ’ere to-day.
They want yous to go for soldiers, an’ the best you can do, my dear children"--the old ’ooman was cryin' very much, makin’ herself so--"is to go to sleep in the barn."
An’ we'll put ’em to sleep in the barn, an’ give ’em their week's victuals with ’em' (what they used to take reglar), sez the old ’ooman to the old man.
'We can soon put Ashypelt out o’ the road.'
(He was listenin’ all the time, the poor Ashypelt, listenin’ wot the old ’ooman was sayin'.)
'Soon as we've put the eleven sons in the barn we'll set fire to ’em about twelve o'clock and burn ’em: that's the best way to take it out of ’em.
We'll burn ’em,' she sez.Poor Ashypelt gets up out o’ the esshole--this was about the hour of eleven: they was sittin’ up till twelve to set the barn afire.
He goes up to the barn, an’ ’ee throws ’is brothers up one after another neck and crop--an’ they was goin’ to kill ’im--an’ their week's victuals.
'Oo are you?'
they sez.p.
236'I am your brother Ashypelt,' he sez, 'I am your brother Ashypelt.
'So one looks at ’im, an’ another looks at ’im, to find a certain mark as they know to him.
They went to kill poor Ashypelt for throwing them up.He sez, 'My father and mother is goin’ to set you afire, all the lot o’ you, that's the reason they put you in the barn.
An’ come with me up on that back edge, an’ you'll see the barn goin’ afire directly,' sez Ashypelt.They sat on this high edge tel twelve o'clock come, an’ they was lookin’ out, an’ they seen the old ’ooman an’ the old man go with a lantern, an’ puttin’ a light to the barn an’ all the straw what was in it.
So they thanked Ashypelt very much for savin’ their lives, but they didn't injure their father or mother; but they all started to go on the road together.
They comes to twelve cross-roads; an’ poor Ashypelt, never bein’ out o’ the esshole before, ’ee took very sleepy, through bein’ a very ’ot day.So one brother sez to the other, 'We'll all take a road to ourselves.
Each one will take a road, an’ in twelve months an’ a day we'll all meet ’ere agen.
'So poor Ashypelt the sun overcame ’im, an’ ’im never bein’ out o’ the esshole, ’ee fell asleep; an’ each brother left a mark on the road which way they went, for ’im to go ’is road to ’imself.
When poor Ashypelt wakened up, ’ee began lookin’ round ’im an’ rubbin’ ’is eyes.
They left ’im a very old nasty lane to go up, an old nasty lane with the mud up to your knees.
Poor Ashypelt bein’ very weak, he got fast several times goin’ up this old lane, an’ tumbled down in the mud; an’ the ’edges was growed very high with ’em so meetin’ together; and the briers was scratching poor Ashypelt's eyes very near out, as ’ee was goin’ up this old lane.
’Ee travels on, over high dales an’ lofty mountains, where the cock never crowed and the divel never sounded ’is bugle horn.
It'll last tel to-morrow night, but I don't mean to half tell you so long.
1 But poor Ashypelt got benighted up this old lane.
’Ee used to fall asleep, bein’ summer-time, an’ very early in the mornin’ come daylight ’ee wakens up, an’ ’ee kept on the same old lane all the way he was goin’.
’Ee travels on tel ’ee come to a castle an’ a new ’ouse, where p. 237there was a man, an’ ’ee axed this man could ’ee give ’im a job.’Ee sez, 'Yes, Ashypelt, I can give you a job,' ’ee sez.
’Ee sez, 'Wot can you do?
'Ashypelt sez, 'I can do everythink as you try to put me to.'
'Well, Ashypelt,' ’ee sez, 'I'll give you fifty pounds to sleep into the castle all night, an’ a good suit o’ clo’es.''Oh!
yes,' ’ee sez; 'I'll sleep there,' ’ee sed.So ’ee sez to Ashypelt, ’ee sez, 'You shall have a good bag o’ nuts to crack an’ plenty o’ ’bacca to smoke, an’ a good fire to sit by,' ’ee sez.But ’ee allowed him no can o’ beer to drink, plenty o’ water, so as he wouldn't get trussicated.
An’ ’appen about eleven o'clock at night ’ee sez, 'Now Ashypelt, it is about the time you've got to come in along o’ me.
'So ’ee takes Ashypelt with ’im about eleven o'clock to this castle.
’Ee opens the door, an’ ’ee sez, 'There you are, go an’ take your seat, an’ sit down.'
’Ee sez, 'Here is your bag o’ nuts, an’ plenty o’ ’bacca to smoke.
'So just now Ashypelt was sittin’ down, an’ just about the hour o’ twelve ’ee could ’ear a lot o’ noise about the room.
’Ee looks around behind ’im at the door, an’ ’ee sees a man naked.So ’ee sez, 'Come up to the fire an’ warm you.
You looks very cold.
'It was a sperrit, you see.
’Ee wouldn't come up to the fire, so Ashypelt went an’ fetched im.
Ashypelt sez, 'Will you ’ave a smoke?'
’ee sez, an’ ’ee takes an’ ’ee fills ’im a new pipe.
’Ee sez, 'Will you crack some nuts?
'So ’ee smoked all poor Ashypelt's ’bacca, an’ cracked all ’is nuts, an’ poor Ashypelt ’ad none.
But ’ee sez, 'You are a very greedy fellow indeed, I must say,' ’ee sed, 'after a man bringing you up to warm you at the fire, an’ taking every-think off ’im.
'Just about the hour o’ two o'clock away goes this man from ’im.
So therefore Ashypelt sits contented down afore the fire to hisself.So next mornin’ the master sez to ’im at the hour o’ six o'clock, 'Are you alive, Ashypelt?''Oh!
yes,' ’ee sez to ’im, 'I am alive, sir.
An’ there came a very rude man ’ere last night, an’ took all myp.
238