Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter VI. Polish-Gypsy Stories: No. 48.--Tale of a Wise Young Jew and a Golden Hen
There was once a rich nobleman who had lived with his wife for ten years without having any children.
One time he dreamt that he would have a very warlike son.
Another time he dreamt again that a Jewess was going to be confined on the same day as his lady.
(This was true!)
Next morning this lord arose and said to his wife, 'Wife, I dreamt that we are going to have a child.
''That may really come to pass,' she answered.He further told her of the Jewess; he said she would be brought to bed at the very same hour as her ladyship.The good God ordained that she should be delivered of a child; the good God gave them a son.
The boy's father was very joyful, as were also the mother and that Jewess, who was brought to bed at the very same hour as this lady.The nobleman said to his wife, 'My lady, we must go to this Jewess, in order that our child may be brought up with hers.
''Very well, husband.
'They brought thither the Jewess, and she made her home there, near this nobleman's dwelling.He begins to grow up, this son of the nobleman.
He isp.
176very wise; yet the son of the Jewess is still wiser.
He is now ten years old, and is eager to go to school; he learns there to perfection.
His father and mother are filled with delight.Once the Jewish boy said to the lord's son, 'Look here, now, why not request your father to have some beautiful baths made for you in the fields?
'The nobleman's son approached his father, kissed his hand, as also his mother's.
'Father,' said he, 'I beg that you will build me some fine baths in the fields.
'Who should it happen to be that set themselves to this work?
Two old retainers.
They had seen in a town some time before a very beautiful princess.
Well, what have they gone and done, these two servitors?
They have caused the portrait of this princess to be painted on the walls of the baths.
These two servants came back and announced to their lord, 'We have done everything we were ordered to do.
''Very good.
How much now do you ask for it?
''We shall be satisfied with whatever your grace deigns to give us.
'The nobleman gave them four thousand florins.
They accorded to their lord their best thanks.
Then the Jew boy called to the nobleman's son, 'Come, the baths are now built, let us see what there is to be seen.
'Thither they went, but this young Jew was always wiser than the nobleman's son.
They entered the first hall, where they saw painted upon the walls various kinds of birds, wolves; all which delighted the son of the lord.
Then all by himself he enters the other apartment, and what does he behold there?
The portrait of this lovely princess painted on one of the walls.
He gazes at the likeness of the princess, and is so greatly enchanted with it that he swoons away.
The young Jew sees him (swoon); he revives him with vinegar; and he asks the nobleman's son, 'What is the matter with you?
''O brother, if I do not have this princess to wife I shall kill myself.
''Hush, for the love of God,' replied the young Jew; 'do not cry so loud.
For you shall perhaps have her indeed, only not so soon as you wish.
'He returned home very sick, this nobleman's son.p.
177'What ails him?'
asks his father; but the young Jew was ashamed to own what had happened.
Orders were given to fetch doctors with all speed; various remedies are administered; but he has nothing the matter with him, for he is quite well, only withering away for the sake of this princess.
'What's to be done with him?'
this lord asks himself.
He sends the mother to question her son, that he may reveal to her what it is that has happened.The mother comes to him.
'What is the matter, my child?
Don't be ashamed to tell me everything.
''Ah, mother,' he answered, 'even though I were to tell you all, you would not be able to give me any advice.
''On the contrary, my son, I will give you very good advice.
'Then he said to her, 'Mother, I have seen the likeness of a beautiful princess in these fine baths; if I do not have her to wife I shall kill myself.
'The mother hears this with delight.
'That is well, my son.
In the meantime, where am I to find her?
'But the Jew lad said to the nobleman, 'My lord, I will go with him to seek the princess.
I make myself answerable for his person, and if any harm befalls him, punish me.
''Very well, then; get ready, and set out with the help of God.
'They set out, and on the further side of a large town the young Jew saw a beautiful wand on the road and a little key beside it.
'I shall dismount and pick up that wand,' said he.But the nobleman's son said to him, 'What good will that wand do you?
You can buy yourself a fine sword in any town.
'But the young Jew replied, 'I don't want a sword; I wish to take that wand.
'Well, he got down from his horse; he picked up this wand and the little key.
He got into the saddle again, and they went on their way with the help of God.
They came to a great forest, where night surprised them.
They saw a light shining in this forest.
'See,' said the lord's son, 'there's a light shining over yonder.
'They came up to this light; they went into the room; there was no one within.
There they see a beautiful bed,p.
178but unoccupied.
They see that there is food for them.
There is a golden goblet on the side next to the nobleman's son; and beside the young Jew there is a goblet of silver.
The nobleman's son would have seated himself beside the silver goblet, but the young Jew said to him, 'Listen to me, brother.
You are the son of a wealthy sire, and I am a poor man's son; your place therefore is beside the goblet of gold, and I will seat myself beside the silver goblet.
'Thereafter he disrobed him deftly, and made him lie down on the bed.
'Come you to bed, brother,' said the nobleman's son.
'I don't feel sleepy,' replied the young Jew.
'Well, I'm going to sleep at any rate.
'He placed himself beside the table, this young Jew, and pretended to fall asleep.
Two ladies approached the young Jew, but they were not really ladies--they were fairies.
1 These ladies spoke thus to one another, 'Oh!
this young Jew and this nobleman's son are going to a capital, where they wish to carry away the king's daughter.
But,' said they, 'the young Jew did well to pick up that wand with the little key, for there will be an iron door, which with that key he will be able to open.
'These ladies went away with the help of God.
The young Jew undressed himself and went to bed.
They arose next morning; they came to that iron door; the young Jew dismounted and opened it.
They see that this is the capital wherein dwells the princess.
They went into this town; they see a gentleman passing.
The young Jew asks him, 'Where is there a first-rate inn in this place?'
The gentleman indicated such a one to them, and guided them to it.
He paid him for his trouble.
They ate until they were satisfied.
The nobleman's son remained in the inn, and the young Jew sallied out into the town.
He saw a gentleman passing.
'Stay, sir, I have something to ask of you.
'The gentleman stopped, and the young Jew asked him, 'Where is the principal goldsmith's in this town?
'He directed him there; the young Jew went to this goldsmith.
'Will you make me an old hen and her chickens of gold?
p. 179