Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter VI. Polish-Gypsy Stories: No. 49.--The Golden Bird and the Good Hare
Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, two wise and one foolish.
This king had an apple-tree which bore golden apples; but every night some one robbed him of these apples.
The king inflicted severe punishment on his servants.One time his eldest son said to him, 'Father, I am going to watch the golden apple-tree, and if I do not catch the thief you shall kill me.
''Very well; go, then.
'He went to stand guard, but in the night-time a golden bird came and stole a golden apple from the tree.Next day the king arose, and asked of his son, 'Have you caught the thief?'
The king counted the apples on the tree: one of them was missing.
'Well,' said he to his son, 'you shall be put to death.
'The notables of the kingdom, and everybody, prayed that he would pardon him.
The king pardoned him.Then the other brother said to the king, 'Father, I also will go and keep watch; it may be that I shall seize the thief.
''Very well; then go.
'He made his preparations, and went on guard.
The golden bird came once more and stole an apple from the tree.Next day the king arose and asked of his son, 'Have you caught the thief?
''No, father, I have not caught him, for he has escaped me.
''Did you see him, then?'p.
183'Yes, I saw him.
''Well, then, how was he able to escape you?
You shall be killed.
'Then the queen and all the nobles entreated him.
He pardoned this other son.The king returned to his house.Then the third brother, the fool, came to beg him that he would allow him to go and guard the golden apple-tree.
'Father,' said he, 'it must be that I shall catch this thief.
''Go, then, fool that thou art,' replied the king; 'your wise brothers have kept watch, and could not take him; and you, what will you do, fool?
''Never mind, father, wise though my brothers may be, they knew not how to secure the thief.
I, who am a fool, shall know better than they how to capture him.
''Very well; then, go.
But you shall be put to death if you do not take him.
''Very well, father, I agree to it that you kill me; but if I do secure the thief, it is I who am to kill you.
''Very well, I shall not seek to excuse myself.
'He made his preparations.
He went to keep watch.
He climbed up into the tree to watch there.
He stuck a needle into a twig, and leant his chin upon it.
'Whenever I feel sleepy,' said he to himself, 'the needle will prick me, and I shall be aroused.
'Just at daybreak he saw a golden bird come, intending to steal one of the golden apples.
He perceived this, and, firing at the bird, knocked out three feathers of gold.
These he picked up and kept in his hand.He got up in the morning and went to his father, who asked him, 'Have you seized the thief?
What have you taken from him?
''I have blown off a piece of his shirt with a musket-shot.
'Then said the king to him, 'Now you may kill me.
''Father, I grant you your life.
'He showed him the three golden feathers, whereupon his father became blind, so dazzled was he by the terrible gleam.
'What shall we do now, unfortunates that we are?
'The eldest brother said to his father, 'I am going in quest of this bird.'p.
184'Well, go, my son; have a care of me.
'He took plenty of money with him and a beautiful horse.
He set out in quest of this bird.
He went away far out into the world.
Once he saw a fine inn.
He went in.
He ordered something to eat and drink.
He hears, this son of the king, that they are wrangling in the next room.
He looks through the keyhole and sees twelve young ladies playing at cards.
He gently opens the door a little, and these damsels call to him, 'Come away, sir, and play with us.
'He goes in, and he loses all his money at play.
He sells his horse, and loses that money too.
He sells his clothes, and still loses.
Lastly, he asks these damsels to lend him a hundred florins.
They lend them to him, and he loses the hundred florins.
'What shall I do now, pauper that I am?
'These damsels have him arrested and put into prison.
For six months he sees no one, this eldest brother.Then his younger brother made his preparations, and requested his father to let him go in quest of the golden bird.His father said to him, 'Each of you goes away, and none returns.
Very well, go.
'He took even more money than his brother and a finer horse.
He set out, and came to the same inn.
He makes them serve him with something to eat and drink.
He hears people wrangling in the next room.
He opens the door a little, and sees twelve damsels playing at cards.
'Come away, sir, and play with us.
'He sits down to play, and loses all his money.
He sells his horse for a large sum, which he loses in the same way.
He sells his clothes, and loses likewise.
Lastly, he borrows a hundred florins from the twelve damsels, and loses them also.
'What shall I do now, pauper that I am?
'These damsels have him arrested and put into prison.Then the king says, 'See, it is full six months since my two sons set out, and neither of them has returned.
'Then the fool, the youngest brother, wishes to go in quest of this bird.
He requests his father to let him go and seek the golden bird.
'Well, go, my boy.
Fool though you are, perhaps youp.
185will bring this bird to me sooner than your two wise brothers, who set out and return not.
'So he made his preparations.
He set out without money, without anything save two bottles of wine, but he set out with the help of God.
After a very long journey he came to a small wood.
In this wood he saw a lame hare, which fled away from him.
He would have killed this hare, but it besought him, 'Have the fear of God; do not kill me.
For I know where you are going, and I will tell it to you.
''That is well,' replied this foolish prince; and he dismounted from his horse.
He drew a fine loaf out of his pocket, and gave it to the hare to eat.
For himself, he drank some of his wine, and said to this hare, 'If I gave you wine too, you would certainly not drink any of it?
''Why should I not drink any of it, my lord?'
replied the hare; 'you have only to give me some.
'Well, he gave him some.
The hare drank of it, and thanked him courteously.
Then the foolish prince asked him, 'What was that you said to me just now?
''I will tell you that you are going in quest of the golden bird, three of whose feathers you knocked out with a musket-shot.
You showed them to your father, who has consequently become blind.
''Yes, that is so.
''But listen: there will be various birds; there will be a cage of diamonds, a cage of gold, a cage of silver, and a cage of wood.
In the first there will be a diamond bird, in the second a golden bird, in the third a silver bird, and in the fourth a miserable, common bird.
Beware of taking one of the birds with a beautiful cage, or it will bring misfortune on you.
Now, get on my back, and leave your horse to graze in this forest.
'He mounted the hare, and on arriving at the place where these birds were he dismounted.
Then said the hare to him again, 'For God's sake, beware of touching a bird with a beautiful cage, but take the one in a common cage.
'Well, then, he goes in to steal, and he sees that there are three miserable cages.
'Why,' said he, 'should I take one of these, when I can take a bird with a beautiful cage?'
He then espied a cage of diamonds with a diamond bird in it.p.
186