Guleesh na Guss Dhu

 (from this point onward the stories are all in English with no Gaelic text] 
 THERE was once a boy in the County Mayo, and he never washed a foot from the day he was born. Guleesh was his name; but as nobody could ever prevail on him to wash his feet, they used to call him Guleesh na guss dhu, or Guleesh Black-foot. It's often the father said to him: "Get up, you  strone-sha  (lubber), and wash yourself;" but the devil a foot would he get up, and the devil a foot would he wash. There was no use in talking to him. Every one used to be humbugging him on account of his dirty feet, but he paid them no heed nor attention. You might say anything at all to him, but in spite of it all he would have his own way afterwards. 
 One night the whole family were gathered in by the fire, telling stories and making fun for themselves, and he amongst them. The father said to him: "Guleesh, you are one and twenty years old to-night, and I believe you never washed a foot from the day you were born till to-day." 
 "You lie," said Guleesh, "didn't I go a' swimming on May day last? and I couldn't keep my feet out of the water." 
 "Well, they were as dirty as ever they were when you came to the shore," said the father. 
 "They were that, surely," said Guleesh. 
 "That's the thing I'm saying," says the father, "that it wasn't in you to wash your feet ever." 
 "And I never will wash them till the day of my death," said Guleesh. 
 "You miserable  behoonugh!  you clown! you tinker! you good-for-nothing lubber! what kind of answer is that?" says the father; and with that he drew the hand 
 
 and struck him a hard fist on the jaw. "Be off with yourself;" says he, "I can't stand you any longer." 
 Guleesh got up and put a hand to his jaw, where he got the fist. "Only that it's yourself that's in it, who gave me that blow," said he, "another blow you'd never strike till the day of your death." He went out of the house then and great anger on him. 
 There was the finest  lis,  or rath, in Ireland, a little way off from the gable of the house, and he was often in the habit of seating himself, on the fine grass bank that was running round it. He stood, and he half leaning against the gable of the house, and looking up into the sky, and watching the beautiful white moon over his head. After him to be standing that way for a couple of hours, he said to himself: "My bitter grief that I am not gone away out of this place altogether. I'd sooner be any place in the world than here. Och, it's well for you, white moon," says he, "that's turning round, turning round, as you please yourself; and no man can put you back. I wish I was the same as you." 
 Hardly was the word out of his mouth when he heard a great noise coming like the sound of many people running together, and talking, and laughing, and making sport, and the sound went by him like a whirl of wind, and he was listening to it going into the rath. "Musha, by my soul," says he, "but ye're merry enough, and I'll follow ye." 
 What was in it but the fairy host, though he did not know at first that it was they who were in it, but he followed them into the rath. It's there he heard  the fulparnee, and the folpornee, the rap-lay-hoota, and the roolya-boolva,*  that they had there, and every man of 
 
 