THE BATTLE OF VELLA N-DRUCHAR. [a]
THE Sea Kings, in their predatory wanderings, landed in Genvor Cove, and, as they had frequently done on previous occasions, they proceeded to pillage the little hamlet of Escols.
On one occasion they landed in unusally large numbers, being resolved, as it appeared, to spoil many of the large and wealthy towns of Western Cornwall, which they were led to believe were unprotected.
It fortunately happened that the heavy surf on the beach retarded their landing, so that the inhabitants had notice of their threatened invasion.That night the beacon-fire was lit on the chapel hill, another was soon blazing on Castle-an-Dinas, and on Trecrobben.
Cam Brea promptly replied, and continued the signal-light, which also blazed lustrously that night on St Agnes Beacon.
Presently the fires were seen on Belovely Beacon, and rapidly they appeared on the Great Stone, on St Bellarmine's Tor, and Cadbarrow, and then the fires blazed out on Roughtor and Brownwilly, thus rapidly conveying the intelligence of war to Prince Arthur and his brave knights, who were happily assembled in full force at Tintagel to do honour to several native Princes who were at that time on a visit to the King of Cornwall.
Arthur, and nine other kings, by forced marches, reached the neighbourhood of the Land's-End at the end of two days.
The Danes crossed the land down through the bottoms to the sea on the northern side of the promontory, spreading destruction in their paths.
Arthur met them on their return, and gave them battle near Vellan-Druchar.
So terrible was the slaughter, that the mill was worked with blood that day.
Not a single Dane of the vast army that had landed escaped.
A few had been left in charge of the ships, and as soon as they learned the fate of their brethren, they hastened to escape, hoping to return to their own northern land.
A holy woman, whose name has not been preserved to us, "brought home a west wind" by emptying the Holy Well against the hill, and sweeping the church from the door to the altar.
Thus they were prevented from escaping, and were all thrown by the force of a storm and the currents either on the rocky shore, or on the sands, where they were left high and dry.
It happened on the occasion of an extraordinary spring-tide, which was yet increased by the wind, so that the ships lay high up on the rocks, or on the sands; and for years the birds built their nests in the masts and rigging.Thus perished the last army of Danes who dared to land upon our western shores.King Arthur and the nine kings pledged each other in the holy water from St Sennen's Well, they returned thanks for their victory in St Sennen's Chapel, and dined that day on the Table-men.Merlin, the prophet, was amongst the host, and the feast being ended, he was seized with the prophetic afflatus, and in the hearing of all the host proclaimed-- "The northmen wild once more shall land, And leave their bones on Escol's sand.
The soil of Vellan-Druchar's plain Again shall take a sanguine stain; And o'er the mill-wheel roll a flood Of Danish mix'd with Cornish blood.
When thus the vanquish'd find no tomb, Expect the dreadful day of doom."