PADSTOW HOBBY HORSE.THE MORNING SONG
MR. GEORGE RAWLINGS writes, September 1, 1865:-- Formerly all the respectable people kept the anniversary decorated with the choicest flowers, but some unlucky day a number of rough characters from a distance joined it, and committed some sad assaults on old and young--spoiling all their nice summer clothes, and covering their faces and persons with smut.
From that time--fifty years since--the procession is formed of the lowest.
The Maypole was once decorated with the best flowers-- now, with only some elm branches and furze in blossom.
The horse is formed as follows :-- The dress is made of sailcloth painted black--a fierce mask-- eyes red--horse's head--horse-hair matte and tail distended by a hoop.
Some would call it very frightful.
Carried by a powerful man--they could inflict much mischief with the snappers, &c. No doubt it is a remnant of the ancient days, and it represents the Devil, or the power of Darkness.
They commence singing at sunrise.
Unite and unite and let us all unite,For summer it is come unto day;And whither we are going we all will uniteIn the merry morning of May.
Arise up, Mr. --, and joy you betide,For summer is come unto day;And bright is your bride that lays by your sideIn the merry morning of May.
Arise up, Mrs. --, and gold be your ring,For summer is come unto day;And give to us a cup of ale, the merrier we shall singIn the merry morning of May.
Arise up, Miss --, all in your smock of silk,For summer is come unto day;And all your body under as white as any milk,In the merry morning of May.
The young men of Padstow might, if they would, For summer is come unto day;They might have built a ship and gilded her with goldIn the merry morning of May.
Now fare you well, and we bid you good cheer,For summer is come unto day;We will come no mote unto your house before another year, In the merry morning of May.
THE DAY SONGAwake, St. George, our English knight,For summer is a' come O, and winter is ago;And every day God give us His graceBy day and by night O!
Where is St. George, where is he O?He is out in his long boat all on the salt sea O!And in every land O!
the land where'er we go,And for to fetch the summer home.
The summer and the May O, For summer is a conic, And winter is a go.
Where are the French dogs that make such boast O?They shall eat the grey goose feather,And we will cattle roast O !And in every land O !
the land where'er we go,The summer and the May O   Thou mightst have shown thy knavish face!Thou mightst have tarried at home O !But thou shalt be an old cuckold,And thou shalt wear the horns O;The summer and the May O.
ADDITIONAL CHORUS   With hal-an-tow  and jolly rumble O,For summer is a come O, and winter is a go,And in every land O, the land where'er we go,Up flies the kite, and down falls the lark O !Aunt Ursula Birdhood she had an old ewe,And she died in her own park O !And for to fetch the summer home.