"ST GEORGE"--THE CHRISTMAS PLAYS.
THE Christmas play is a very ancient institution in Cornwall.
At one time religious subjects were chosen, but those gave way to romantic plays.
The arrangements were tolerably complete, and sometimes a considerable amount of dramatic skill was displayed.
"St George, and the other tragic performers, are dressed out some.
what in the style of morris-dancers, in their shirt sleeves and white trousers, much decorated with riblbons and handkerchiefs, each carryg a drawn sword in his hand, if they can be procured, otherwise a cudgel.
They wear high caps of pasteboard, adorned with beads, small pieces of looking-glass, coloured paper, &c. ; several long strips of pith generally hang down from the top, with small pieces of different coloured cloth strung on them; the whole has a very smart effect.
Father Christmas is personified in a grotesque manner, as an ancient man wearing a large mask and wig, and a huge club, wherewith he keeps the bystanders in order.
The Doctor, who is generally the merryandrew of the piece, is dressed in any ridiculous way, with a wig, three-cornered hat, and painted face.
The other comic characters are dressed according to fancy.
The female, where there is one, is usually in the dress worn half a century ago.
The hobbyhorse, which is a character sometimes introduced, wears a representation of a horse's hide.
Beside the regular drama of "St George," many parties of mummers go about in fancy dresses of every sort, most commonly the males in female attire, and vice versa.
BATTLE OF ST GEORGE Room, a room, brave gallants, room !
Within this court I do resort To show some sport And pastime, Gentlemen and ladies, in the Christmas time.
Here comes I, Old Father Christmas; Welcome or welcome not, I hope Old Father Christmas Will never be forgot.
I was born in a rocky country, where there was no wood to make me cradle; I was rocked in a stouring bowl, which made me round shouldered then, and I am round shouldered still.
Who went to the orchard to steal apples to make gooseberry pies against Christmas ?
Enter Turkish Knight Here comes I, a Turkish Knight, Come from the Turkish land to fight; And if St George do meet me here, I'll try his courage without fear.
Enter St George Here comes I, St George, That worthy champion bold; And, with my sword and spear, I won three crowns of gold.
I fought the dragon bold, And brought him to the slaughter; By that I gain'd fair Sabra, To the King of Egypt's daughter.
T.K.
St George, I pray, be not too bold         If thy blood is hot, I'll soon make it cold St. G Thou Turkish knight, I pray forbear;         I'll make thee dread my sword and spear.
St. G I have a little bottle, which goes by the name Elicumpane;         If the man is alive, let him rise and fight again.
T.K.
Oh pardon me, St George; oh pardon me, I crave;         Oh pardon me this once, and I will be thy slave.
St. G I'll never pardon a Turkish knight;         Therefore arise and try thy might.
St G Is there a doctor to be found         To cure a deep and deadly wound ?
Enter Doctor         Oh yes, there is a doctor to be found,         To cure a deep and deadly wound.
St. G What can you cure ?
Doctor I can cure the itch, the palsy, and gout;         If the devil's in him.
I'll pull him out.
Ashes to ashes, dust to dust;         If Uncle Tom Pearce won't have him, Aunt Molly must.
Enter Old Squire         Here comes I, old, Old Squire         As black as any friar         As ragged as a colt,         To leave fine clothes for malt.
Enter Hub Bub         Here comes I, old Hub Bub Bub Bub;         Upon my shoulders I carries a club,         And in my hand a frying pan,         So am I not a valient man ?
Enter the Box-holder         Here comes I, great head and little wit;         Put your hand in your pocket, and give what you think fit.
Gentlemen and ladies sitting down at your ease,         Put your hand in your pocket, and give me what you please.