Legends and Stories of Ireland
The King and the Bishop THERE are few things more pleasant to those who are doomed to pass the greater part of their lives in the dust and din and, smoke of a city than to get on the top of a stage-coach early some fine summer morning, and whirl along through the yet unpeopled streets, echoing from their emptiness to the rattle of the welcome wheels that are bearing you away from your metropolitan prison, to the "Free blue streams and the laughing sky" of the sweet country. How gladly you pass the last bridge over one of the canals I and then, deeming yourself fairly out of town, you look back once only on its receding "groves of chimneys," and settling yourself comfortably in your seat, you cast away care, and look forward in gleeful anticipation of your three or four weeks in the 'tranquility and freedom of a country ramble. Such have my sensations often been - not a little increased, by-the-by, as I hugged closer to my side my portfolio, well stored with paper, and heard the rattle of my pencils and colours in the tin sketching box in my pocket. Such were they when last I started one fresh and lovely summer's morning, on the Ballinasloe coach, and promised myself a rich treat In a visit to Clonmacnoise, or "the Churches," as the place is familiarly called by the peasantry. Gladly I descended from my lofty station on our dusty conveyance, when it arrived at Shannonbridge, and engaging a boat, embarked on the noble river whence the village takes its name, and proceded up the wide and winding stream to the still sacred and once celebrated Clonmacnoise, the second monastic foundation established in Ireland, once tenanted by the learned and the powerful, now scarcely known but to the mendicant pilgrim, the learned antiquary, or the vagrant lover of the picturesque. Here, for days together, have I lingered, watching its noble, "ivy-mantled" tower, reposing in shadow, or sparkling in sunshine, as it spired upward in bold relief against the sky; or admiring the graceful involutions of the ample Shannon that wound beneath the gentle acclivity on which I stood, through the plashy meadows and the wide waste of bog, whose rich brown tones of colour faded into blue on the horizon; or in noting the red-tanned sail of some passing turf-boat, as it broke the monotony of the quiet river, or in recording with my pencil the noble stone cross, or the tracery of some mouldering ruin, "Where ivied arch, or pillar Ione, though I should not say "haughtily," for poor old Clonmacnoise pleads with as much humility as the religion which reared her now does; and which, like her, interesting in the attitude of decay, teaches and appeals to our sympathies and our imagination, instead of taking the strongholds of our reason by storm, and forcing our assent by overwhelming batteries of irrefragable proof, before it seeks to win our will by tender and impassioned appeals to the heart. But I wander from Clonmacnoise. It is a truly solemn and lonely spot; I love it almost to a folly, and have wandered day after day through its quiet cemetery, till I have almost made acquaintance with its ancient grave-stones. One day l was accosted by a peasant who had watched for a long time, in silent wonder, the draft of the stone cross, as it grew into being beneath my pencil; and finding the man "apt," as the ghost says to Hamlet, I entered Into conversation with him. To some remark of mine touching the antiquity of the place, he assured me "it was a fine  "You see, sir," said he, "the one down there beyant, at the river side, was built the first, and finished complate entirely, for the roof is an it, you see; but when that was built, the bishop thought that another id look very purty on the hill beyant, and so he bid the masons set to work, and build up another tower there. "'And now,' says he, 'my gay fellows,' says be, 'the divil a down out o' that you'll come antil you larn manners, and take what's offered to yees,' says he; ' and when yees come down in your price you may come down yourselves into the bargain.' "Well, sure enough, he kep his word, and wouldn't let man nor mortyel go nigh them to help them; and faiks the masons didn't like the notion of losing, their honest airnins, and small blame to them; but sure they wor starvin' all the time, and didn't know what in the wide world to do, when there was a fool chanc'd to pass by, and seen them. "'Musha! but you look well there,' says the innocent, 'an' how are you?' says he. "'Not much the better av your axin,' says they. "'Maybe you're out there,' says he. So he questioned them, and they tould him how it was with them, and how the bishop tuk away the ladthers, and they couldn't come down. "Tut, you fools!' says he; 'sure isn't it aisier to take down two stones nor to put up one?' "Wasn't that mighty cute o' the fool, sir? And wid that, my dear sowl, no sooner said than done. Faiks, the masons began to pull down their work, and whin they went an for some time, the bishop bid them stop, and he'd let them down; but faiks, before he gev in to them they had taken the roof clane off; and that's the raison that one tower has a roof, sir, and the other has none." But before I had seen Clonmacnoise and its towers, I was intimate with the most striking of its legends by favour of the sinewy boatman,who rowed me to it, We had not long left Shannonbridge, when, doubling an angle of the shore, and stretching up a reach of the river where it widens, the principal round tower of Clonmacnoise became visible. "What tower is that?" said I to my Charon. "That's the big tower of Clonmacnoise, sir," he answered; "an' if your honour, looks sharp, a little to the right of it, lower down, you'll see the ruins of the ould palace." On a somewhat closer inspection, I did perceive the remains he spoke of; dimly discernible in the distance; and it was not without his indication of their relative situation to the tower that I could have distinguished them from the sober grey of the horizon behind them, for the evening was closing fast, and we were moving eastward. "Does your honour see it yit?" said my boatman. "I do," said I. "God spare you your eye-sight," responded he, "for troth it's few gintlemen could see the ould palace this far off, and the sun so low, barrin' they were used to  "Two towers?" said l; "then l suppose one has fallen?" "Not at all, sir," said he; "but the other one that you can't see is beyant in the hollow by the river-side." "And it was a great place, you say, in the  "Troth it was, sir, and is still, for to this day it  "Pilgrims!" I ejaculated. "Yes, sir," said the boatman, with his own quiet manner, although it was evident to a quick observer that my surprise at the mention of pilgrims had not escaped him. I mused a moment. Pilgrims, thought I, in the  "And so," continued I aloud, "you have pilgrims at Clonmacnoise?" "And the palace," said I, "I suppose belonged to the bishop of Clonmacnoise?" "Some says 'twas the bishop, your honour, and indeed it is them that has larnin' says so; but more says 'twas a king had it long ago, afore the Churches was there at all, at all; and sure enough It looks far oulder nor the Churches, though them is ould enough, God knows. All the knowledgable people I ever heerd talk of it says that; and now, sir," said he, in an expostulatory tone, "wouldn't it be far more nath'ral that the bishop id live in the Churches? And sure," continued, he, evidently leaning to the popular belief, "id stands to  Satisfying himself with this most logical conclusion, he pulled his oar with evident self-complacency; and as I have always found, I derived more legendary information by yielding somewhat to the prejudice of the narrator, and by "Well, sir, they say there was a king wanst lived in the palace beyant, and a sportin' fellow he was, and  "Well, sir, it was all mighty well, antil the ould bishop I mintioned arrived at the Churches; but whin he kem, he tuk great scandal at the goings-an of the king, and he determined to cut him short in his coorses all at wanst; so with that whin the king wint to his duty, the bishop ups and he tells him that he must mend his manners, and all to that; and when the king said that the likes o' that was never tould him afore by the best priest o' them all, 'More shame for them that  "But to make a long, story short, the king looked mighty black at the bishop, and the bishop looked twice, blacker at him again, and so on, from bad to worse, till they parted the bittherest of inimies: and the king, that was the best o' friends to the Churches afore, swore be this and be that he'd vex them for it, and that he'd be even with the bishop alore long. "Now, sir, the bishop might jist as well have kept never mindin' the king's little  "And so it fell out a little before he had the  "Now, Corny, sir, let alone bein' stout, was mighty dark, and if he wanst said the word, you might as well sthrive to move the rock of Dunamaise as Corny, though without a big word at all, at all, but as  "' "'Oh, no throuble in life, plaze your Riverince,' says Corny, 'we'll unload it ourselves, your Riverince,' says he. "So with that they began unloading, first one boat, and then another; but sure enough, every individual cashk of it went up to the palace, and not a one to the Churches; so whin they seen the second boat a'most empty, quare thoughts began to come into their heads; for before this offer the first boat-load was always sent to the bishop, after a dhrop was taken 'to the king, which, you know, was good manners, sir; and the king, by all accounts, was a gentleman, every inch of him. So, with that, says one of the monks: "'My blessin' an you, Corny, my son,' says he, 'sure it's not forgettin' the bishop you'd be, nor the Churches,' says he, 'that stands betune you and the divil.' "Well, sir, at the word divil, 'twas as good as a play to see the look Corny gave out o' the corner of his eye at the monk. "'Forget yez,' says Corny, 'throth it's long afore me or my  "'God bless your work, boys,' says the bishop; for, sure enough, 'twas the bishop himself kem down to the river side, having got the  "'No occasion in life, plaze your Riverince,' says Corny; 'I'm intirely obleeged to your lordship, but we're able for the work ourselves,' says he. And without sayin' another word, away went the barrel out of the boat, and up on their shoulders, or whatever way they wor takin' it, and up the bill to the palace. "'Hillo!' says the bishop, 'where are yiz goin' with that wine?' says he. "'Where I tould them,' says Corny. "'Is it to the palace?' "'Faith, you jist hit it,' says Corny. "'And what's that for?' "For fun,' says Corny, no ways  "'Is that the answer you give your clergy, you reprobate?' says the bishop. 'I'll tell you what it is, Corny,' says he, 'as sure as you're standin' there I'll excommunicate you, my fine fellow, if you don't keep a civil tongue in your head.' "'Sure it wouldn't be worth your Riverince's while,' says Corny, 'to excommunicate the likes o' me,' says he, 'while there's the king my masther to 'the fore, for your holiness to play bell, book, and candle-light with.' "'Do you mane to say, you scruff of the earth,' says the, bishop, 'that your masther, the king, put you up to what you're doing?' "'Divil a thing else I mane,' says Corny. "'You  "'Yes, but I did, though,' says the king, puttin' in his word fair an aisy; for he was lookin' out o' his dhrawing-room windy, and run down the hill to the river when he seen the bishop goin', as he thought, to put his  "'So,' says. the bishop, turnin' round quite short to the king--'so "'He has my commands for what he done,' says the king, quite stout; 'and more be token, I'd have you to know he's no villian at all,' says he, 'but a thrusty servant, that does his masther's biddin'.' "'And don't you intind sendin' any of this wine over to my Churches beyant?' says the bishop. "'The divil receave the dhrop,' says the king. "' And what for?' says the bishop. "'Bekase I've changed my mind,' says the king. "'And won't you give the Church wine for the holy mass?' says the bishop. "'The mass!' says the king eyin' him mighty sly. "'Yes, sir--the mass,' says his Riverince, colouring up to the eyes -' the mass.' "'Oh,  "'What do you mane?' says' the bishop--and his nose got blue with fair rage. "'Oh, nothin',' says the king with a toss of his head. "'Are you a gintleman?' says the bishop. "'Every inch o' me,' says the king. "'Then sure no gintleman goes back of his word,' says the other. "'I won't go back o' my word, either,' says the king. 'I promised to give wine for the mass,' says he, 'and so I will. Send to my palace every Sunday mornin', and you shall have a bottle of wine, and that's plinty; for I'm thinkin',' says the king, 'that so much wine lyin' beyant there is neither good for your bodies nor your sowls.' "'What do you mane?' says the bishop, in a great passion, for all the world like a turkey-cock. "'I mane, that when your wine-cellar is so full,' says the king, 'it only brings the fairies about you, and makes away with the wine too fast,' says he, laughin'; 'and the fairies to be about the Churches isn't good, your Riverince,' says the king; 'for I'm thinkin',' says he, 'that some of the spiteful little divils has given your Riverince a blast, and burnt the ind of your nose.' "With that, my dear, you couldn't hould the bishop with the rage he was in; and says he," You think to dhrink all that 'wine--but you're mistaken,' says he. 'Fill your cellars as much as you like,' says the bishop, ' "Well, sir, sure enough, the king fell sick of a suddent, and all the docthors in the country round was sent for; but they could do him no good at all, at all--and day by day he was wastin' and wastin', and pinin', and pinin', till the flesh was worn off his bones, and he was as bare and as yallow as a kite's claw; and then, what would you think, but the drooth came an him sure enough, and be was callin' for dhrink every  "Well, when the clock struck twelve that night, the drooth was an him worse nor ever, though he dbrunk as much that day--ay, troth, as much as would turn a mill; and he called to his servants for a dhrink of  "'The grule's all out,' says they. "'Well, then, give me some  "'There's none left, my lord,' says they. "'Then give me a dhrink of wine,' says he. "'There's none in the room, dear,' says the nurs-tindher. "'Then go down to the wine-cellar,' says he, 'and get some.' "'With that, they whit to the wine-cellar--but, jew'l machree, they soon run back into his room, with their faces as white as a sheet, and tould him there was not one dhrop of wine in all the cashks in the cellar. "'Oh, murther! murther!' says the king, ' "And then, God help iz! they bethought themselves of what the bishop said, and the curse he laid an the king. "'You've no gruel?' says the king. "'No,' says they. "'Nor "'No,' 'says the sarvants. "'Nor wine?' says the king. "'Nor wine either, my lord,' says they. "'Have you no  "'Not a dhrop,' says the nurse-tindher. "'Then,' says the king, 'for the tindher marcy of God, gi' me a dhrlnk of wather.' "And what would you think, sir, but there wasn't a dhrop of wather in the place. "'Oh, murther! murther!' says the king, 'isn't it a poor case that a king can't get a dhrink of wather in his own house? Go then,' says he, 'and get me a jug of wather out of the ditch.' "For there was a big ditch, sir, all round the palace. And away they run for wather out of the ditch, while the king was roarin' like mad for the drooth, and his mouth like a coal of fire. And sure, sir, the story goes, they couldn't find any wather in the ditch! "'Millia murther! millia murther!' cries the king, "will no one take pity an a king that's  "And they all thrimbled again, with the fair fright, when they heerd this, and thought of the ould bishop's prophecy. "'Well,' says the poor king, 'run down to the Shannon,' says be, 'and sure, at all event,, you'll get wather there,' says he. "Well, sir, away they run with pails and noggins down to the Shannon, and (God betune us and harm!) what do you think, sir, but the river Shannon was dhry! So, av coorse, when the king heer the Shannon ass gone dhry, it wint to his heart; and he thought o' the bishop's curse an him--and givin' one murtherin' big  "And now, air," says 'my historian, with a look of lurking humour in his dark grey eye, "isn't that mighty wondherful-- 