Legends and Stories of Ireland
New Potatoes In the merry month of June, or thereabouts, the aforesaid melody may be heard, in all the wailing intonation of its  We Irish are conversational, the lower orders particularly so, and the hawkers who frequent the streets often fill the lapses that occur between their cries by a current conversation with some passing friend, occasionally broken by the deponent "labouring in her calling" and yelling out: "Brave lemons" or "Green  Such was the case, as I happened to overhear a conversation between Katty, a  Such is the manner in which the following sketch from Nature came into my possession. That it is altogether slang, I premise; and give all fastidious persons fair warning, that if a picture from low life be not according to their taste, they can leave it unread, rather than blame me for too much fidelity in my outline. So here goes at a    "MY NEW PITTATATEES!"   Enter Katty, with a grey cloak, a dirty cap, and a black eye; a sieve of potatoes  KATTY--" "Bad luck attend you; bad cess to you, you pot-walloppin' varmint," says he (maynin' me, i' you plaze)--"wait till I ketch you, you sthrap, and it's I'll give you your fill iv"--'  So, with that, I knew the villian was  SAL.--Musha! God help you, Katty. Well, as he was comin' upstairs (knowin' 'how it 'd be), I thought it best to take care o' my--"  SAL.--Why would you call such a 'tarnal vagabone darllnt? "You lie," says he, "you impident sthrap, I'm not disguised; but, if I'm disguised itself," says he, "I'll make you know the differ," says he. Oh! I thought the life id lave me, when I heerd him say the word; and with that I put my hand an--" SAL.--Oh, the ruffin. "Keep the pace, you vagabone," says he; and with that he hits me a lick av a SAL.--Oh, the hangin' bone villain! "How do I know that, you flag-hoppin' jade," says he. (Think o' that, Sally jew'l - misdoubtin' my vartue, and I an honest woman, as l am. God help me!!!) SAL.--Oh! but you're to be pitied, Katty dear. "Would you fight your match?" says the poor innocent man. "Lave my sight," says Mike, "or by jingo, I'll put a stitch in your side, my jolly tailor," says he. "Yiv put a stitch in your wig already," says the tailor, "and that'll do for the present writin'." And with that, Mike. was goin' to hit him with  SAL.--Oh, my blissin' on thim. But I'll not brake your heart any more, Sally dear. God's good, and never opens one door but he shuts another, and that's the way iv it; and strinthins the wake with--" KAT.--Who calls?  