THE POOR BROTHER AND THE RICH.
THERE was a poor brother and a rich brother before now.
The work that the poor one had, was to be at drains; he hired a gillie, and they had nothing with their mealtime but to take it without sauce.
"Had'nt we better," said the gillie, "steal a cow of thy brother's lot?"
They went and they did this.
The rich brother was taking a notion that it was they who stole his cow; and he did not know in what way he could contrive to find out if it were they who stole her.
He went and he put his mother-in-law in a kist, and he came to seek room for the kist in his brother's house; he put bread and cheese with the crone in the kist; and there was a hole in it, in order that she might find out everything.
The gillie found out that the crone was in the kist; he wetted sacks and put them on top of the kist; the water was streaming out of the sacks on the crone, and she was not hearing a word.
He went, in the night, where the crone was, and he said to her, "Was she hearing?"
"I am not," said she."
"Art thou eating a few?"
"I am not."
"Give me a piece of the cheese, and I will cut it for thee."
He cut the cheese, and he stuffed it into her throat till she was choked.
The kist was taken home, and the dead crone in it.
They buried the crone, and they laid out but little on her.
In the night, said the poor man's gillie to his master, "Is it not lamentable that such and such linen should go with the crone to the cell, 1 while the children are so much in want of shirts?"
He went, and he took a spade with him, and he reached the church-yard.
He dug the grave, and he took the crone from the coffin; he took off her the tais dress, he threw her on his back, and he came to the house of the rich brother; he went in with her, and he placed her seated at the fireside, and the tongs between her two feet.
When the maid servant rose in the morning, she fell in a faint when she saw the crone before her.
The rich brother thrashed his wife because of her mother saying, "that she was about to bring him to bare ruin."
He went to the house of his poor brother and told that the crone had come home.
"Ah ha!"
said the gillie, "because thou didst not spend enough on her living, thou wilt spend it on her dead; I saw the like of this before; thou must lay out a good deal on her."
They bought a good lot of things for the funeral, and they left the one half of it in the house of the poor brother and they buried the crone again.
"Is it not lamentable," said the poor brother's gillie to his master, "that such a lot of linen should go on the crone, while thou art so much in want of a shirt thyself?"
He went to the cell that night again, he raised the crone, he took off her the tais clothes, and he took her with him on his back; he went into the house of the rich brother, as was usual, and be set the crone standing at the end of the dresser, with her claw full of seeds from the dish of sowens, as if she were eating it