Gypsy Folk Tales: Chapter III. Bukowina-Gypsy Stories: No. 28.--The Beautiful Mountain
Gypsy Folk Tales, by Francis Hindes Groome, , at sacred-texts.comSomewhere far off were a quarryman and his wife.
They had a son in their old age.
They died.
An old man comes to beg, and asks boy will he come with him to seek fortune.
They go.
'Wishme into a horse.'
Boy does so.
'Jump on my back.'
He does so.
They take the road.
Horse warns boy to help anything in distress.
Boy finds a little fish cast up by the tide, and puts it back in the water.
Fish promises gratitude.
They cross the Beautiful Mountain.
Horse warns boy to touch nothing.
A feather blows in his mouth.
He spits it out again and again, but it returns.
He looks at it, thinks it pretty, puts it in his pocket.
They descend other side of the mountain.
Boy hears noise of bellowing in a castle.
Finds sick giant in bed, without servant-maid.
Boy gets him food.
Giant promises gratitude.
Horse asks boy if he touched anything on mountain.
'Nothing but this feather.'
'That feather will bring you sorrow, but keep it now you have it.'
They come to a castle.
Boy asks for work.
Master tests his hand-writing.
Engages him.
Wants him to sleep indoors; he prefers stable beside his old horse (cf.
Grimm, No.
126, ii.
155, also for pen).
They marvel at his penmanship, done with this feather.
One day the master's man steals the pen by a ruse, and brings it to master: 'Master, the man that got the feather can get the bird.'
Boy tells horse what they want him to do.
Horse tells him to ask for three days' leave and three sacks of gold.
Horse and boy go off.
They go and get the bird, choosing the dirtiest and ugliest bird (cf.
Polish-Gypsy story, No.
49, for choosing bird in common cage).
The master's man says, 'Master, the bird is fair, but fairer still the lady' (that owned it).
Boy told to fetch lady; he tells horse.
Horse reminds him that he said the feather would bring him trouble.
Three more days and three purses of gold.
Horse says, 'Wish me into a boat on the sea.'
The boat is full of the finest silk.
They sail under the castle.
Lure lady on board to see silk.
She goes into cabin.
Boy weighs anchor and off.
Lady comes up, and drops her keys into sea.
They return.
Man says to master, 'Master, the man that got the lady can get the castle.'
Boy tells horse.
Horse reminds him of unlucky feather.
Three more days and bags of gold.
They go.
Horse reminds boy of giant's promise.
Giant puts chain round castle and drags it along.
The castle is walled round and locked.
Lady demands her keys.
Boy and horse go off, call the little fish.
He fails to find keys.
Tries again and brings them up.
Keys given to lady.
Lady says, 'Which would you prefer, Jack, to have your head cut off or your master's head cut off?'
Boy says, 'Cut off mine, not his.'
Lady says, 'You have spoken well.
Had you not spoken thus, your own head would have been cut off.
Now the master's head will fall, not yours.'
Boy and lady wed, and live in the castle still.
'Now you've got it.'