PECULIAR WORDS AND PHRASES [a]
"THE people in the west," writes a correspondent, "have I adopted many words from the Danish invaders."
Tradition assures us that the sea-rovers of the North frequently landed at Witsand Bay, burned and pillaged the villages of Escols and Mayon, sometimes took off the women, but never made a settlement.
Certain red-haired families are often referred to as Danes and the dark-haired people will not marry with "a red-haired Dane.'
He continues :-- "If you were in Buryan Church town this evening, you might probably hear Betty Trenoweth say, 'I 'll take off my touser [toute serve], and run up to Janey Angwins to cousey  a spell; there's a lot of boys gone in there, so there'll be a grand courant [de courir], I expect.'
In a short time Betty may come back disappointed, saying, ' 'Twas a mere cow's courant after all, cheld vean--all hammer and tongs.'"
The touser is a large apron or wrapper to come quite round and keep the under garments clean.
By a courant with the boys, they mean a game of running romps.
It is not at all uncommon in other parts of the country to hear the people say, "It was a  fine courant," "We 'ye had a good courant," when they intend to express the enjoyment of some pleasure party.
These are, however, probably more nearly allied to Norman-French.
There are some proverbial expressions peculiar to the west :-  "Sow barley in dree, and wheat in pul."
"To make an old nail good, right it on wood."
" Fill the sack, then it cars stand."
The last meaning that neither man nor beast can work on an empty stomach.
The following are a few of less common expressions, presenting remarkable words :-  'Tis not bezibd--It is not allotted me.
He will never scrip it--He will never escape it.
He is nothing pridy--He is not handsome.
Give her dule--Give her some comfort or consolation.
Hark to his lidden--Listen to his word or talk.
-  It was twenty or some--It was about twenty.
The wind brings the pilme--The wind raises the dust.
How thick the brusse lies--How thick the dust lies.
He is throyting--He is cutting chips from sticks.
He came of a good havage--He belongs to a good or respectable family.
Hame--a straw collar with wooden collar-trees, to which are fastened the rope traces.
Scalpions (buckthorn, or rather buckhorn)--salt dried fish, usually the whiting.
"Eating fair maids, or fermades--(fumadoes) --, and drinking mahogany [gin and treacle]."