The Key of Gold: Czech Folk Tales: 6. Three Doves
p. 67A CERTAIN merchant died.
His son was nineteen years old at the time.
He said to his mother: "Mother dear, I'm going to try my luck in the world.
"His mother answered: "Go, dear son, but don't stay long there, for I am old, and should like some help in my old age."
She fitted him out for the journey, and said good-bye to him.Out into the world went the son, and he travelled on till he came into a forest.
He had been going through it for three days, and no end appeared.
On the third day he kept on and came at last to a cottage.
He went into the cottage and he saw a horrible being seated on a stool.
The fellow asked him where he was going.
"I don't know where I am going.
I'm seeking my fortune in some service.
""Well, if you like, you can enter my service."p.
68The lad was very hungry, so he took service with the other.His master said to him: "You must serve me for a year at least.
"So he served him for a year.
He was treated very well, and he was a faithful servant to his master.
The master was a sorcerer, but he didn't do any harm to the lad.
He had a big pond, and three doves used to come there to bathe.
Each of them had three golden feathers.
These three doves were three enchanted princesses.When the year's service was ended, the sorcerer said: "What wages shall I give you?
"The lad said he left it to him.
"You're a good lad," said the sorcerer.Come with me to my cellar and take as much money as you like, gold or silver, just as you wish.
"So the lad took as much as he could carry, and the sorcerer gave him one of the three doves too, saying:"When you get home, if you haven't got a house of your own, have one built, and then pluck those three feathers out of the dove, and hide them away so carefully that no humanp.
69eye can see them.
The dove will turn into a lovely princess and you may marry her.
"So he took the dove and returned home.
He had a house built and made a secret place in one of the walls for the three feathers.
When he plucked out the feathers the dove became a beautiful princess, but she did not know where the feathers were.
But his mother knew quite well, for he had told her all and showed her where the feathers were hidden.When they had been living together for three years he went a-hunting one day with another lord, and his mother stayed at home with her daughter-in-law.
The mother said to her: "Dear daughter-in-law, I can't tell you how beautiful I think you.
If one were to search the whole world through, one couldn't find so beautiful a woman.
"The daughter-in-law answered: "Dear lady, the beauty I have now is nothing to what I should have had I but one of my golden feathers.
"The mother went straight off, fetched one of the feathers, and gave it to her.She thrust it into her skin, and she was immediately far more beautiful than before.
The mother kept looking at her, and said:p. 70