The Key of Gold: Czech Folk Tales: 9. Shepherd Hynek
    To cut a long story short, there was a prince and he had three sons.
The first two followed in their father's footsteps, but the third did not.
He said he would like to be a forester.
The father was angry and turned him out of the house.
What was he to do with the fellow, when he was so obstinate and would be a forester?
"Well, be whatever you like," said the prince, and he gave him a shepherd's dress and Hynek went out into the world.
He had been walking through a forest for three days.
He was hungry and cold, and everything seemed to be against him.
He was tired too, and at last he fell asleep under a tree.
As he was sleeping, a black man came to him.
He would not leave him to sleep, but waked him up.
Hynek was frightened.
But he told him there was no need to be afraid.
He was a good man, though his skin was black.
So Hynek stayed with him for seven years and learnt the seven languages, zither playing, and all that sort of thing.
Now the seven years were over.
In that land there was a king who had an only daughter.
And there was a fierce dragon which was ravaging the whole of that kingdom, and everybody was forced to give him one sheep and one human being to appease him.
So the lot fell upon the princess too.
The black man told Hynek that something ought to be done to deliver the people and to save the princess from being devoured by that dragon.
"Go to the next homestead," he said, and ask to be taken on as a shepherd, and in the morning you will have to drive the sheep into this forest."
So they took leave of one another.
Hynek was engaged as shepherd, and in the morning he drove the sheep into the forest, where the black man was waiting for him.
When he came with the sheep, the black man gave him a wand and a ring, and said: "When you turn this ring, you will be brought to a castle where a giant dwells, and you will have to tackle the giant.
This wand will help you to do it.
Then you must take his robe, his horse, and his sword.
Then you will be brought to the town, and it will be about the time that the princess will be brought out."
So Hynek took his leave and found every-thing just as he had said.
As he came near to the castle, the giant was looking out and said: "You earthworm, what are you looking for?"
"Oh!
I should like to have a try for that big head of yours."
The giant fell into a rage.
He was holding a great club in his hand, and he flung it at Hynek, but Hynek dodged aside and the club sank deep into the ground, it had been flung with such force.
So Hynek went right up to him, and, crack!
he struck him with the wand.
So the giant tumbled over.
Hynek took his sword and struck his head off.
Then he took an iron key out of the giant's pocket.
He opened the lock, took the robe and the horse, and dressed himself as became a knight.
Then he turned the ring, and in a moment he found himself on the road along which they were bringing the princess to be devoured by the dragon.
When he saw the procession, he asked: "What's going on here, and why are the people in such grief?"
"Because the princess is to be devoured by a dragon to-day."
Hynek said: "For the sake of her beauty, show me his den where he dwells."
So he rode up to the rock and called out loudly: "Now, dragon, come on; your meal is ready here, waiting for you."
But the dragon answered: "I don't want it to-day; come to-morrow, at eleven."
So Hynek returned.
He rode towards them and said that the dragon would not leave his den to-day.
So they all went back to the town with the knight, and the king would not let him go away on any account.
But Hynek began to make excuses.
He had to deliver a letter for the field marshal and he could not remain there.
Then he turned the ring on his finger, and instantly he was in the castle again.
He left the clothes and the horse there, putting the clothes tidily together.
Then he put on his shepherd's dress, turned the ring, and at once he was near the forest, where the black man had been tending his sheep meanwhile.
He greeted him kindly: "You have done everything well.
Always act like that."
So he drove the sheep home and played the zither again.
Everybody ran up to the door to listen to the magic playing of the shepherd.
But he said nothing to anybody.
The next day he drove the sheep to the forest still earlier.
The black man was there waiting for him, and said: "Follow my advice and you will be happy."
He said that he would do so.
The black man was to mind the sheep again.
He gave Hynek the wand and the ring, and Hynek came to another castle.
The giant was looking out as he came up; he was standing in the doorway.
He asked the lad grimly what he was looking for.
"Oh!
it's nothing.
I only want to try for that big head of yours."
The giant was holding a hammer and he hurled it at him.
No eye could see where it fell.
Hynek leapt towards him, and, crack!
he struck him with the wand, and the giant fell over and Hynek cut his head off too.
He took a silver key out of the giant's pocket and went straight to the castle.
There he chose a robe, girded on a sword, took a horse, and turned the ring again.
Once more he was on the road where the princess was being brought to be devoured.
He asked them in a different language why they were wailing so.
"Well, our princess is to be devoured by the dragon to-day.
He would not leave his den yesterday."
"Show me his den: I will sacrifice myself for the sake of her beauty."
They showed him the rock, and he rode straight up to it and called out: "Now, dragon, come on; your meal is ready here."
"I don't want it to-day, wait till eleven to- morrow."
The king was still less willing to let him go this time, but he found some excuse, turned his horse, and went back with everything to the castle.
Then he returned to the forest and the black man.
The black man said: "Drive your sheep home now, but come earlier to-morrow, for a heavy task awaits you."
Hynek could not rest that night: he was so afraid that he would be too late.
As soon as dawn came he let out the flock and drove it to the forest.
When he got there, the black man said to him: "There's only to-day now.
It will be the last time.
But it will be a heavy task for you to tackle the third giant and the dragon."
Then he gave him the wand and the ring, and said that the key to-day would be of gold.
He must choose the robe and take a black horse, and he must take with him the sword with which he had killed the giant and the dragon.
He turned the ring and was brought to the third castle.
Here was a giant again, much huger than the other two.
He ran at Hynek, but, crack!
Hynek struck him with the wand.
Then he took his sword and killed him.
Then he opened the castle with a golden key; he went to the stable, then he put on a green robe and brought out a black horse.
There was a sword hanging there, and he girded it on.
Then he turned the ring, and in a moment he was on the road along which they were bringing the princess to be devoured by the dragon.
He asked them in yet another language why they were so sorrowful.
He was ready to sacrifice himself for the sake of her beauty.