The Key of Gold: Czech Folk Tales: 7. The Bear, the Eagle, and the Fish
ONCE there was a count and he had three daughters.
All of them were young and as pretty as peacocks, but the youngest was the loveliest of them all.
The count had little money to spend, for he had lost it all by gambling.
And so--since he had to spend the time in some way or other--he used to go hunting., One day when he was out hunting he lost his way in a forest, and he could not find his way out of it.
Suddenly a big bear rushed out at him, shouting at the top of his voice.
He said he would show him the way out of the forest and, besides, he would give him as much gold and silver as he wanted on one condition, and that condition was that the count should give him one of his daughters in marriage.
The count was terrified.
But after thinking it over for a time, he consented at last.
The bear showed him the way outp.
95of the forest and gave him everything he had promised, and so the count was pleased.He spent his time eating and drinking and gambling, till all the money melted away.
He never so much as gave a thought to the bear, until one day, when the eldest daughter was marriageable, a carriage came rolling up.
The carriage was drawn by a pair of raven-black horses, and in it sat a prince with cheeks of white and red, whose robes blazed with gold.
He came and took the eldest daughter and drove off.
The countess wept, but the count did not mind a bit, but being short of money, he began hunting again.One day he lost his way again, and this time an eagle flew down to him and promised to show him the way out of the forest, and to give him heaps of money into the bargain, if he would only give him his second daughter in return.
The bargain was made and the eagle fetched away the second daughter, and only the youngest was left at home.
Yet even her the count sold, and it was a fish that got her.So the count and the countess were left alone.
They were very sad, but after a time a boy was born to them, and they watchedp.
96over him like the apple of their eye.
When the boy was grown up, he saw that the countess looked sad sometimes, and he gave her no rest till she had told him everything.
When he had heard the story, he put his best clothes on, took his sword, mounted his horse, and said good-bye to his parents, telling them that he was going to search for his lost sisters.So he rode on till he came to the eldest sister.
Her he found playing with three little bear cubs, for these were her babies.
He met his brother-in-law, who gave him three hairs and told him to rub those hairs with his fingers if he found himself in any difficulty.
Then he went to the second sister, and found her with two eaglets and the old eagle, his brother-in-law, as well.
The eagle gave him three feathers, saying they would be of help to him in time of need.
He thanked the eagle for that and went on his way, and at last he came to his youngest sister.
It was not so easy to get to her, for she dwelt under the water, and he had to drop into her house through the chimney.
He would have missed the chimney if it hadn't been for the smoke from it: it was bluish smoke, hardly visible.p.
97