NURSERY STORIES. THE STORY OF THE WHITE PET. 1

THERE was a farmer before now who had a White Pet, 2 and when Christmas was drawing near, he thought that he would kill the White Pet.
The White Pet heard that, and he thought he would run away and that is what he did.
He had not gone far when a bull met him.
Said the bull to him, "All hail!
White Pet, where art thou going?"
"I," said the White Pet, "am going to seek my fortune; they were going to kill me for Christmas, and I thought I had better run away."
"It is better for me," said the bull, "to go with thee, for they were going to do the very same with me."
"I am willing," said the White Pet; "the larger the party the better the fun."
They went forward till they fell in with a dog.
"All hail!
White Pet," said the dog.
"All hail!
thou dog."
"Where art thou going?"
said the dog.
"I am running away, for I heard that they were threatening to kill me for Christmas."
"They were going to do the very same to me,"     said the dog, "and I will go with you."
"Come, then," said the White Pet.
They went then, till a cat joined them.
"All hail!
White Pet."
said the cat.
"All hail!
oh cat."
"Where art thou going?"
said the cat.
"I am going to seek my fortune," said the White Pet, "because they were going to kill me at Christmas."
"They were talking about killing me too," said the cat, "and I had better go with you."
"Come on then," said the White Pet.
Then they went forward till a cock met them.
"All hail!
White Pet," said the cock.
"All hail to thyself!
oh cock," said the White Pet.
"Where," said the cock, "art thou going?"
"I," said the White Pet, "am going away, for they were threatening my death at Christmas."
"They were going to kill me at the very same time," said the cock, "and I will go with you."
"Come, then," said the White Pet.
They went forward till they fell in with a goose.
"All hail!
White Pet," said the goose.
"All hail to thyself!
oh goose," said the White Pet.
"Where art thou going?"
said the goose.
"I," said the White Pet, "am running away, because they were going to kill me at Christmas."
"They were going to do that to me too," said the goose, "and I will go with you."
The party went forward till the night was drawing on them, and they saw a little light far away; and, though far off, they were not long getting there.
When they reached the house, they said to each other that they would look in at the window to see who was in the house, and they saw thieves counting money; and the White Pet said, "Let every one of us call his own call.
I will call my own call; and let the bull call his own call; let the dog call his own call; and the cat her own call; and the cock his own call; and the goose his own call."
With that they gave out one shout--GAIRE!
When the thieves heard the shouting that was without, they thought the mischief was there; and they fled out, and they went to a wood that was near them.
When the White Pet and his company saw that the house was empty, they went in and they got the money that the thieves had been counting, and they divided it amongst themselves; and then they thought that they would settle to rest.
Said the White Pet, "Where wilt thou sleep to-night, oh bull?"
"I will sleep," said the bull, "behind the door where I used" (to be).
"Where wilt thou sleep thyself, White Pet?"
"I will sleep," said the White Pet, "in the middle of the floor where I used" (to be).
"Where wilt thou sleep, oh dog?"
said the White Pet.
"I will sleep beside the fire where I used" (to be), said the dog.
"Where wilt thou sleep, oh cat?"
"I will sleep," said the cat, "in the candle press, where I like to be."
"Where wilt thou sleep, oh cock?"
said the White Pet.
"I," said the cock, "will sleep on the rafters where I used" (to be).
"Where wilt thou sleep, oh goose?"
"I will sleep," said the goose, "on the midden, 1 where I was accustomed to be."
They were not long settled to rest, when one of the thieves returned to look in to see if he could perceive if any one at all was in the house.
All things were still, and he went on forward to the candle press for a candle, that he might kindle to make him a light; but when he put his hand in the box the cat thrust her claws into his hand, but he took a candle with him, and he tried to light it.
Then the dog got up, and he stuck his tail into a pot of water that was beside the fire; he shook his tail and put out the candle.
Then the thief thought that the mischief was in the house, and he fled; but when he was passing the White Pet, he gave him a blow; before he got past the bull, he gave him a kick; and the cock began to crow; and when he went out, the goose began to belabour him with his wings about the shanks.
Re went to the wood where his comrades were, as fast as was in his legs.
They asked him how it had gone with him.
"It went," said he, "but middling; when I went to the candle press, there was a man in it who thrust ten knives into my hand; and when I went to the fireside to light the candle, there was a big black man lying there, who was sprinkling water on it to put it out; and when I tried to go out, there was a big man in the middle of the floor, who gave me a shove; and another man behind the door who pushed me out; and there was a little brat on the loft calling out CUIR-ANEES-AN-SHAW-AY-S-FONI-MI-HAYN-DA--   When the thieves heard that, they did not return to seek their lot of money; and the White Pet and his comrades got it to themselves and it kept them peaceably as long as they lived.