 THE FAIRY AND THE MILLER'S WIFE. 1

ONE day as a mother was sitting rocking her baby to sleep, she was surprised, on looking up, to see a lady of elegant and courtly demeanour, so unlike any one she had ever seen in that part of the country, standing in the middle of the room.
She had not heard any one enter, therefore you may judge it was with no little surprise, not unmingled with curiosity, that she rose to welcome her strange visitor.
She handed her a chair, but she very politely declined to be seated.
She was very magnificently attired; her dress was of the richest green, embroidered round with spangles of gold, and on her head was a small coronet of pearls.
The woman was still more surprised at her strange request.
She asked, in a rich musical voice, if she would oblige her with a basin of oatmeal.
A basin full to overflowing was immediately handed to her, for the woman's husband, being both a farmer and miller, had plenty of meal at command.
The lady promised to return it, and named the day she would do so.
One of the children put out her hand to get hold of the grand lady's spangles, but told her mother afterwards that she felt nothing.
The mother was afraid the child would lose the use of her hands, but no such calamity ensued.
It would have been very ungrateful in her fairy majesty if she had struck the child powerless for touching her dress, if indeed such power were hers.
But to return to our story.
The very day mentioned the oatmeal was returned, not by the same lady, but by a curious little figure with a yelping voice; she was likewise dressed in green.
After handing the meal, she yelped out, "Braw meal; it's the top pickle of the sin corn."
It was excellent; and what was very strange, all the family were advised to partake of it but one servant lad, who spurned the fairy's meal; and he dying shortly after, the miller and his wife firmly believed it was because he refused to eat of the meal.
They also firmly believed their first visitor was no less a personage than the Queen of the Fairies, who, having dismissed her court, had not one maid of honour in waiting to obey her commands.
A few nights after this strange visit, as the miller was going to bed, a gentle tap was heard at the door, and on its being opened by him, with a light in his hand, there stood a little figure dressed in green,--who, in a shrill voice, but very polite manner, requested him to let on the water and set the mill in order, for she was going to grind some corn.
The miller did not dare to refuse, so did as she desired him.
She told him togo to bed again, and he would find all as he had left it.
He found everything in the morning as she said he would.
So much for the honesty of fairies.