 THE WITCHES OF DELNABO. 1

IN the time of my grandmother, the farm of Delnabo was proportionally divided between three tenants.
At first equally comfortable in their circumstances, it was in the course of some time remarked by all, and by none more forcibly than by one of the said three portioners, that, although superior in point of industry and talent to his two fellow-portioners, one of the tenants was daily lapsing into poverty, while his two neighbours were daily improving in estate.
Amazed and grieved at the adverse fortune which thus attended his family, compared to the prosperous condition of his neighbours, the wife of the poor man was in the habit of expressing her astonishment at the circumstance, not only to her own particular friends, but likewise to the wives of her neighbours themselves.On one of these occasions, the other two wives asked her what would she do to ameliorate her condition, if it were in her power?
She answered them she would do anything whatever.
(Here the other wives thought they had got a gudgeon that would snap at any bait, and immediately resolved to make her their confidante.)
"Well, then,", says one of the other two wives, "if you agree to keep our communications strictly secret, and implicitly obey our instructions, neither poverty nor want shall ever assail you more."
Promising to attend to their instructions, the poor man's wife took leave of her neighbours, full of those sensations of horror which the discovery of such depravity was calculated to produce in a virtuous mind.
Hastening home to her husband, she thought it no crime to break her promise to her wicked neighbours, and, like a dutiful and prudent wife, to reveal to the husband of her bosom the whole particulars of their interview.
The husband greatly commended his wife's fidelity, and immediately entered into a collusion with her, which displays no ordinary degree of ingenuity.
It was agreed that the husband should exchange apparel with the wife, and that he should, in this disguise, accompany the wives to the place appointed,to see what cantrips they intended to perform.He accordingly arrayed himself in his wife's habiliments, and, at the hour of midnight, joined the party at the place appointed.
The "bride," as they called him, was most cordially received by the two Ladies of the Broom, who warmly congratulated the "bride" upon her good fortune, and the speedy consummation of her happiness.
He was then presented with a fir torch, a broom, and a riddle, articles with which they themselves were furnished.
They directed their course along the banks of the rolling Avon, until they reached Craic-pol-nain, or the Craig of the Birdspool.
Here, in consequence of the steepness of the craig, they found it convenient to pass to the other side of the river.
This passage they effected without the use of the navy, the river being fordable at the place.
They then came in sight of Pol-nain, and lo!
what human eye ever witnessed such a scene before!
The pool appeared as if actually enveloped in a flame of fire.
A hundred torches blazed aloft, reflecting their beams on the towering woods of Loynchork.
And what ear ever beard such shrieks and yells as proceeded from the horrid crew engaged at their hellish orgies on Pol-nain?
Those cries were, however, sweet music to the two wives of Delnabo.
Every yell produced from them a burst of unrestrained pleasure, and away they frisked, leaving the amiable bride a considerable way behind.
For the fact is, that he was in no hurry to reach the scene, and when he did reach it, it was with a determination to be only a spectator,and not a participator in the night's performance.
On reaching the pool's side he saw what was going on,--he saw abundance of hags steering themselves to and fro in their riddles, by means of their oars (the brooms), hallooing and skirling 1 worse than the bogles, and each holding in her left hand a torch of fir,--whilst at other times they would swirl themselves into a row, and make profound obeisance to a large black ugly tyke, 2 perched on a lofty rock, and who was no doubt the "muckle thief" himself, and who was pleased to acknowledge most graciously those expressions of their loyalty and devotion, by bowing, grinning, and clapping his paws.
Having administered to the bride some preliminary instructions, the impatient wives desired him to remain by the pool's side until they should commune with his Satanic Highness on the subject of her inauguration, directing her, as they proceeded on their voyage across the pool, to speed them in their master's name.
To this order of the black pair the bride was resolved to pay particular attention.
As soon as they were embarked in their riddles, and had wriggled themselves, by means of their brooms, into a proper depth of water, "Go," says he, "in the name of the Best."
A horrid yell from the witches announced their instant fate--the magic spell was now dissolved--crash went the riddles, and down sank the two witches, never more to rise, amidst the shrieks and lamentations of the Old Thief and all his infernal crew, whose combined power and policy could not save them from a watery  end.
All the torches were extinguished in an instant, and the affrighted company fled in different directions, in such forms and similitudes as they thought most convenient for them to adopt; and the wily bride returned home at his leisure, enjoying himself vastly at the clever manner in which he had executed the instructions of his deceased friends.
On arriving at his house, he dressed himself in his own clothes, and, without immediately satisfying his wife's curiosity at the result of his excursion, he yoked his cattle, and commenced his morning labours with as little concern as usual.
His two neighbours, who were not even conscious of the absence of their wives (so ably substituted were they by the brooms), did the same.
Towards breakfast-time, however, the two neighbours were not a little astonished that they observed no signs of their wives having risen from bed--notwithstanding their customary earliness--and this surprise they expressed to the late bride, their neighbour.
The latter archly remarked that he had great suspicions, in his own mind, of their rising even that day.
"What mean you by that?"
replied they.
"We left our wives apparently in good health when we ourselves arose."
"Find them now," was the reply--the bride, setting up as merry a whistle as before.
Running each to his bed, what was the astonishment of the husbands, when, instead of his wife, he only found an old broom?
Their neighbour then told them that, if they chose to examine Pol-nain well, they would find both their dear doxies there.
The grieving husbands accordingly proceeded thither, and with thenecessary instruments dragged their late worthy partners to dry land, and afterwards privately interred them.
The shattered vessels and oars of those unfortunate navigators, whirling about the pool, satisfied their lords of the manner by which they came to their ends; and their names were no longer mentioned by their kindred in the land.
It need scarcely be added that the poor man gradually recovered his former opulence; and that, in the course of a short time, he was comparatively as rich as he was formerly poor.