 SANNTRAIGH. 1

THERE was a herd's wife in the island of Sanntraigh, and she had a kettle.
A woman of peace would come every day to seek the kettle.
She would not say a word when she came, but she would catch hold of the kettle.
When she would catch the kettle, the woman of the house would say--"A smith is able to make Cold iron hot with coal.
The due of a kettle is bones, And to bring it back again whole.
"The woman of peace would come back every day with the kettle, and flesh and bones in it.
On a day that was there, the housewife was for going over the ferry to Baile a Chaisteil, and she said to her man, "if thou wilt say to the woman of peace as I say, I will go to Baile Castle."
"Oo!
I will say it.
Surely it's I that will say it."
He was spinning a heather rope to be set on the house.
He saw a woman coming and a shadow from her feet, and he took fear of her.
He shut the door.
He stopped his work.
When she came to the door she did not find the door open, and he did not open it for her.
She went above a bole that was in the house.
The kettle gave two jumps, and at the third leap it went out at the ridge of the house.
The night came, and the kettle came not.
The wife came back over the ferry, and she did not see a bit of the kettle within, and she asked, "Where was the kettle?"
"Well, then, I don't care where it is," said the man; "I never took such a fright as I took at it.
I shut the door, and she did not come any more with it."
"Good-for-nothing wretch, what didst thou do?
There are two that will be ill off--thyself and I."
"She will come to-morrow with it."
"She will not come.
"She hasted herself and she went away.
She reached the knoll, and there was no man within.
It was after dinner, and they were out in the mouth of the night.
She went in.
She saw the kettle, and she lifted it with her.
It was heavy for her with the remnants that they left in it.
When the old carle that was within saw her going out, he said--Silent wife, silent wife, That came on us from the land of chase, Thou man on the surface of the 'Bruth,' Loose the black, and slip the Fierce.
"The two dogs were let loose; and she was not long away when she heard the clatter of the dogs coming.