 ALEXANDER JONES.
"JEAN, sit a wee bit east," requested the town-clerk, between the puffs of his pipe, as he sat on the corner of the bench before his fire one chilly evening.
"You're taking ower muckle room, and mair than your share o' the settle."
But Jean, his wife, had just got her knitting into a nasty tangle, and was not in the best of humours, so declined to move one inch, or to attend to what her husband was saying.
"Jean," said her husband again, "sit a wee bit east; it's no decent to sit sae selfish.
Sit a bit east, d'ye hear?"
and the town-clerk gave his wife a rude shove to her end of the bench.
"Wha' d'ye mean by that?
and wha' d'ye mean by east?"
cried his wife.
"There's nae sic thing as east to begin with, and--" "Nae sic thing as east?"
shouted the town-clerk.
"Will ye no' believe the sun himself?"
and then in a loud voice he declaimed that, as the sun went round the earth every day, and was always rising every moment somewhere in the east, which thing he hoped no one was fool enough to deny, everywhere was the east, all over the place; and if there was anything ridiculous, it was to talk about west.
If everywhere was east, there was nowhere where west could be.
So he hoped his wife would not make a goose of herself, and talk nonsense.
But then his wife got up and said he did not look at it in the right way at all.
On the contrary, the sun was all the day setting somewhere in the west, which thing she hoped no one was fool enough to contradict; and as he was always setting somewhere, and doing it every moment, everywhere was west, and if everywhere was west, there was no room for east to be anywhere.
So she trusted her husband would not make an ass of himself, and mention east again.
But he shook his head, just like a dog that has been bitten behind the ear, and was going to reply, when she kilted her petticoats, and ran round the room in one direction to show how it was done, crying, "West, west, west!"
This made the town-clerk very angry, and he got     tip also, and hitched his trousers, and ran round the table in the opposite direction, yelling out, "East, east, east!"
to show how he thought it was done.
Yet it only ended by their getting very giddy, and banging their heads together, a thing which hurt very much, and did not conduce to good-temper or the solving of the difficulty, you may be sure.
But Alexander Jones sat quiet in the corner, and said nothing.
Still, they agreed in one thing, namely, that the question was of too deep importance to rest there.
So they went to the grocer, who had a good-sized house up the street, and told him all about the thing, with the ins and outs of the question; and the grocer and the grocer's wife, and the grocer's maiden aunt by marriage on the mother's side, and the grocer's wife's youngest married sister, and the grocer's wife's youngest married sister's little girl, were all naturally much interested, to say the least.
But one took one view, and another took another, and they ran round the table, some this way and some that, to explain how in their opinion it was done.
It only ended in their getting very giddy and banging their heads together, a thing which hurt, and did not conduce to good-temper or the solving of the difficulty, you may be sure.
But Alexander Jones sat quiet in the corner all the time, and said nothing.
Still, they agreed in one thing, that the question.
was of too deep importance to rest there.
So the whole lot went to the innkeeper, who had a much larger house than the grocer, down the street, and told him all about the thing, with the ins and outs of the matter; and the innkeeper, and the innkeeper's wife, and the innkeeper's maiden a-Lint by marriage on the mother's side, and the innkeeper's wife's youngest married sister, and the innkeeper's youngest married sister's little girl, were all naturally much interested, to say the least.
But one took one view, and another took another, and they ran round the table, some this way and some that, to explain how in their opinion it was done.
And it only ended by their all getting very giddy and banging their heads together, a thing which hurt, and did not conduce to good-temper or the solving of the difficulty, you may be sure.
But Alexander Jones sat all the time quiet in the corner, and said nothing.
Still, they agreed in one thing., that the question was of too deep importance to rest there.
So the whole lot went to the chief magistrate, who had the very largest house in the burgh, in the middle of the street by the market-place, and they told him all about the thing, and the ins and outs of the matter; and the magistrate, and the magistrate's wife, and the magistrate's maiden aunt by marriage on the mother's side, and the magistrate's wife's youngest married sister, and the magistrate's wife's youngest married sister's little girl, were all naturally much interested in the matter, to say the least.
But one took one view, and another took another, and they ran round the magistrate's table, some this way and some that, to explain how in their opinion it was done; and it only ended by their all getting very giddy and banging their heads together, a thing which hurt, and did not conduce to good-temper or the solving of the difficulty, you may be sure.
But Alexander Jones sat quiet in the corner, and said nothing.
Still, they agreed in one thing, that the question was of too deep importance to rest there.
So the magistrate called a meeting of the whole populace in the town-hall.
And when the populace came to the town-hall, the chief magistrate told them all about it, and the ins and outs of the matter; and the populace, and the populace's wife, and the populace's maiden aunt by marriage on the mother's side, and the populace's wife's youngest married sister, and the populace's wife's youngest married sister's little girl, were all naturally much interested, to say the least.
But one took one view, and another took another.
And they all wanted then to run round a table to explain how each thought it was done; but here a difficulty arose, for, alas!
there was no table in the town-hall to run round, and what then were they to do?
Yet they were not going to be balked for a trifle like that, not they?
So they requested the chief magistrate to stand in the middle, and let them all run round him in the direction it pleased them.
But the chief magistrate objected strongly, for he said it would make him worse than giddy to see some folk going one way round him and some going the other; indeed, it would be certain to make him sick.
So he suggested instead that Alexander Jones should be placed in the middle.
Yes, why could they not run round him?
Better make use of him, he was so stupid, and said nothing; besides, the chief magistrate wanted to run round with the best of them himself, and why should he be cut out more than any one else?
"No, no," cried they all.
"Alexander Jones is too small, and would be certain to be trod upon."
It would not do at all, and the chief magistrate must really do what he was asked.
Hadn't they, only the other day, given him an imitation gold badge to wear on his stom-----well, never mind--and he must do something for them in return, or they'd take it away, that they would.
So the poor man had to give in, but he insisted upon having his eyes bandaged, and also on having a good chair to sit in, otherwise he knew he would be sick; of that he felt certain.
Then they bandaged his eyes with an old dishclout they got from somewhere; for a handkerchief would not go round his face, he had such a very big nose; and, having seated him in a chair, they all ran round him in a circle, some this way, some another; but they all only got very giddy and banged each other's heads, a thing which hurt, and did not conduce to good-temper or to the solving of the difficulty; and, worse than all, just at the end, when they could run no longer, and were quite out of breath, Eliza M'Diarmed, the fat widow who kept the confectionery-shop fell plump against the chief magistrate, and sent him and his chair flying all along the floor.
But Alexander Jones sat quiet in the corner, and said nothing.
Then the chief magistrate pulled the bandage off his eyes in a towering passion, and said something must and should be settled there and then.
No, he would stand it no longer.
He threatened, also, if they did not agree, he would put a tax on buttons; which was rather clever of him, for you see, both sexes would feel that tax equally, and he, inasmuch as his robes were all fastened by a buckle at his neck, and a jewelled girdle round his stom----well, never mind--it would not affect him at all.
At this the town-clerk rose, and said they must, in that case, devise some other way of discovering the answer to this terrible riddle, and he proposed to call in from the street Peter the road-man, for he was up and about at all hours, late and early, and would know more than most about the sun's movements; only, if they asked him, they must ask also his one-eyed sister, Jessica--she, you must know, took in the chief magistrate's washing, and so was a person of importance in the burgh--for Peter would certainly decline to come in unless she came with him.
Now this was, indeed, most provoking for me.
Because, you see, there was not another square inch of room left in the town-hall for another person, and two people would have to go out to let Peter the road-man and his sister Jessica come in.
So they turned me out for one, as being a stranger from the country, only asked there in courtesy; and Alexander Jones for the other, because he was so stupid, and said nothing.
Thus, you see, I never knew what decision the meeting came to, though I am certain it did come to some, as next morning people's clothes were still worn as usual, and buttons were at the same price in the shops as before.
And, though disappointed greatly for my own sake, But why was Alexander Jones so stupid as to sit still in the corner and say nothing?
Oh!
hush, hush now!
how silly you are!
Why, how on earth could he do anything else?
Alexander Jones was the town-clerk's