The Yellow Fairy Book: Hermod and Hadvor
 Once upon a time there were a King and a Queen who had an only daughter, called Hadvor, who was fair and beautiful, and being an only child, was heir to the kingdom.
The King and Queen had also a foster son, named Hermod, who was just about the same age as Hadvor, and was good-looking, as well as clever at most things.
Hermod and Hadvor often played together while they were children, and liked each other so much that while they were still young they secretly plighted their troth to each other.
As time went on the Queen fell sick, and suspecting that it was her last illness, sent for the King to come to her.
When he came she told him that she had no long time to live, and therefore wished to ask one thing of him, which was, that if he married another wife he should promise to take no other one than the Queen of Hetland the Good.
The King gave the promise, and thereafter the Queen died.
Time went past, and the King, growing tired of living alone, fitted out his ship and sailed out to sea.
As he sailed there came upon him so thick a mist that he altogether lost his bearings, but after long trouble he found land.
There he laid his ship to, and went on shore all alone.
After walking for some time he came to a forest, into which he went a little way and stopped.
Then he heard sweet music from a harp, and went in the direction of the sound until he came to a clearing, and there he saw three women, one of whom sat on a golden chair, and was beautifully and grandly dressed; she held a harp in her hands, and was very sorrowful.
The second was also finely dressed, but younger in appearance, and also sat on a chair, but it was not so grand as the first one's.
The third stood beside them, and was very pretty to look at; she had a green cloak over her other clothes, and it was easy to see that she was maid to the other two.
After the King had looked at them for a little he went forward   and saluted them.
The one that sat on the golden chair asked him who he was and where he was going; and he told her all the story —how he was a king, and had lost his queen, and was now on his way to Hetland the Good, to ask the Queen of that country in marriage.
She answered that fortune had contrived this wonderfully, for pirates had plundered Hetland and killed the King, and she had fled from the land in terror, and had come hither after great trouble, and she was the very person he was looking for, and the others were her daughter and maid.
The King immediately asked her hand; she gladly received his proposal and accepted him at once.
Thereafter they all set out, and made their way to the ship; and after that nothing is told of their voyage until the King reached his own country.
There he made a great feast, and celebrated his marriage with this woman; and after that things are quiet for a time.
Hermod and Hadvor took but little notice of the Queen and her daughter, but, on the other hand, Hadvor and the Queen's maid, whose name was Olof, were very friendly, and Olof came often to visit Hadvor in her castle.
Before long the King went out to war, and no sooner was he away than the Queen came to talk with Hermod, and said that she wanted him to marry her daughter.
Hermod told her straight and plain that he would not do so, at which the Queen grew terribly angry, and said that in that case neither should he have Hadvor, for she would now lay this spell on him, that he should go to a desert island and there be a lion by day and a man by night.
He should also think always of Hadvor, which would cause him all the more sorrow, and from this spell he should never be freed until Hadvor burned the lion's skin, and that would not happen very soon.
As soon as the Queen had finished her speech Hermod replied that he also laid a spell on her, and that was, that as soon as he was freed from her enchantments she should become a rat and her daughter a mouse, and fight with each other in the hall until he killed them with his sword.
After this Hermod disappeared, and no one knew what had become of him; the Queen caused search to be made for him, but he could nowhere be found.
One time, when Olof was in the castle beside Hadvor, she asked the Princess if she knew where Hermod had gone to.
At this Hadvor became very sad, and said that she did not.
'I shall tell you then,' said Olof, 'for I know all about it.