The Yellow Fairy Book: Thumbelina
There was once a woman who wanted to have quite a tiny, little child, but she did not know where to get one from.
So one day she went to an old Witch and said to her: 'I should so much like to have a tiny, little child; can you tell me where I can get one?
''Oh, we have just got one ready!'
said the Witch.
'Here is a barley-corn for you, but it's not the kind the farmer sows in his field, or feeds the cocks and hens with, I can tell you.
Put it in a flower-pot, and then you will see something happen.
''Oh, thank you!'
said the woman, and gave the Witch a shilling, for that was what it cost.
Then she went home and planted the barley-corn; immediately there grew out of it a large and beautiful flower, which looked like a tulip, but the petals were tightly closed as if it were still only a bud.
'What a beautiful flower!'
exclaimed the woman, and she kissed the red and yellow petals; but as she kissed them the flower burst open.
It was a real tulip, such as one can see any day; but in the middle of the blossom, on the green velvety petals, sat a little girl, quite tiny, trim, and pretty.
She was scarcely half a thumb in height; so they called her Thumbelina.
An elegant polished walnut-shell served Thumbelina as a cradle, the blue petals of a violet were her mattress, and a rose-leaf her coverlid.
There she lay at night, but in the day-time she used to play about on the table; here the woman had put a bowl, surrounded by a ring of flowers, with their stalks in water, in the middle of which floated a great tulip pedal, and on this Thumbelina sat, and sailed from one side of the bowl to the other, rowing herself with two white horse-hairs for oars.
It was such a pretty sight!
She could sing, too, with a voice more soft and sweet than had ever been heard before.One night, when she was lying in her pretty little bed, an oldtoad crept in through a broken pane in the window.
She was very ugly, clumsy, and clammy; she hopped on to the table where Thumbelina lay asleep under the red rose-leaf.
'This would make a beautiful wife for my son,' said the toad, taking up the walnut-shell, with Thumbelina inside, and hopping with it through the window into the garden.There flowed a great wide stream, with slippery and marshy banks; here the toad lived with her son.
Ugh!
how ugly and clammy he was, just like his mother!
'Croak, croak, croak!'
was all he could say when he saw the pretty little girl in the walnut-shell.
'Don't talk so load, or you'll wake her,' said the old toad.
'She might escape us even now; she is as light as a feather.
We will put her at once on a broad water-lily leaf in the stream.
That will be quite an island for her; she is so small and light.
She can't run away from us there, whilst we are preparing the guest-chamber under the marsh where she shall live.
'Outside in the brook grew many water-lilies, with broad green leaves, which looked as if they were swimming about on the water.The leaf farthest away was the largest, and to this the old toad swam with Thumbelina in her walnut-shell.The tiny Thumbelina woke up very early in the morning, andwhen she saw where she was she began to cry bitterly; for on every side of the great green leaf was water, and she could not get to the land.The old toad was down under the marsh, decorating her room with rushes and yellow marigold leaves, to make it very grand for her new daughter-in-law; then she swam out with her ugly son to the leaf where Thumbelina lay.
She wanted to fetch the pretty cradle to put it into her room before Thumbelina herself came there.
The old toad bowed low in the water before her, and said: 'Here is my son; you shall marry him, and live in great magnificence down under the marsh.
''Croak, croak, croak!'
was all that the son could say.
Then they took the neat little cradle and swam away with it; but Thumbelina sat alone on the great green leaf and wept, for she did not want to live with the clammy toad, or marry her ugly son.
The little fishes swimming about under the water had seen the toad quite plainly, and heard what she had said; so they put up their heads to see the little girl.
When they saw her, they thought her so pretty that they were very sorry she should go down with the ugly toad to live.
No; that must not happen.
They assembled in the water round the green stalk which supported the leaf on which she was sitting, and nibbled the stem in two.
Away floated the leafdown the stream, bearing Thumbelina far beyond the reach of the toad.On she sailed past several towns, and the little birds sitting in the bushes saw her, and sang, 'What a pretty little girl!'
The leaf floated farther and farther away; thus Thumbelina left her native land.A beautiful little white butterfly fluttered above her, and at last settled on the leaf.
Thumbelina pleased him, and she, too, was delighted, for now the toads could not reach her, and it was so beautiful where she was travelling; the sun shone on the water and made it sparkle like the brightest silver.
She took off her sash, and tied one end round the butterfly; the other end she fastened to the leaf, so that now it glided along with her faster than ever.A great cockchafer came flying past; he caught sight of Thumbelina, and in a moment had put his arms round her slender waist, and had flown off with her to a tree.
The green leaf floated away down the stream, and the butterfly with it, for he was fastened to the leaf and could not get loose from it.
Oh, dear!
how terrified poor little Thumbelina was when the cockchafer flew off with her to the tree!
But she was especially distressed on the beautiful white butterfly's account, as she had tied him fast, so that if he could not get away he must starve to death.
But the cockchafer did not trouble himself about that; he sat down with her on a large green leaf, gave her the honey out of the flowers to eat, and told her that she was very pretty, although she wasn't in the least like a cockchafer.
Later on, all the other cockchafers who lived in the same tree came to pay calls; they examined Thumbelina closely, and remarked, 'Why, she has only two legs!
How very miserable!
''She has no feelers!'
cried another.
'How ugly she is!'
said all the lady chafers—and yet Thumbelina was really very pretty.The cockchafer who had stolen her knew this very well; but when he heard all the ladies saying she was ugly, he began to think so too, and would not keep her; she might go wherever she liked.
So he flew down from the tree with her and put her on a daisy.
There she sat and wept, because she was so ugly that the cockchafer would have nothing to do with her; and yet she was the most beautiful creature imaginable, so soft and delicate, like the loveliest rose-leaf.The whole summer poor little Thumbelina lived alone in the great wood.
She plaited a bed for herself of blades of grass, andhung it up under a clover-leaf, so that she was protected from the rain; she gathered honey from the flowers for food, and drank the dew on the leaves every morning.
Thus the summer and autumn passed, but then came winter—the long, cold winter.
All the birds who had sung so sweetly about her had flown away; the trees shed their leaves, the flowers died; the great clover-leaf under which she had lived curled up, and nothing remained of it but the withered stalk.
She was terribly cold, for her clothes were ragged, and she herself was so small and thin.
Poor little Thumbelina!
she would surely be frozen to death.
It began to snow, and every snow-flake that fell on her was to her as a whole shovelful thrown on one of us, for we are so big, and she was only an inch high.
She wrapt herself round in a dead leaf, but it was torn in the middle and gave her no warmth; she was trembling with cold.Just outside the wood where she was now living lay a great corn-field.
But the corn had been gone a long time; only the dry, bare stubble was left standing in the frozen ground.
This made a forest for her to wander about in.
All at once she came across the door of a field-mouse, who had a little hole under a corn-stalk.
There the mouse lived warm and snug, with a store-room full of corn, a splendid kitchen and dining-room.
Poor little Thumbelina went up to the door and begged for a little piece of barley, for she had not had anything to eat for the last two days.
'Poor little creature!'
said the field-mouse, for she was a kind-hearted old thing at the bottom.
'Come into my warm room and have some dinner with me.
'As Thumbelina pleased her, she said: 'As far as I am concerned you may spend the winter with me; but you must keep my room clean and tidy, and tell me stories, for I like that very much.
'And Thumbelina did all that the kind old field-mouse asked, and did it remarkably well too.
'Now I am expecting a visitor,' said the field-mouse; 'my neighbour comes to call on me once a week.
He is in better circumstances than I am, has great, big rooms, and wears a fine black-velvet coat.
If you could only marry him, you would be well provided for.
But he is blind.
You must tell him all the prettiest stories you know.
'But Thumbelina did not trouble her head about him, for he was only a mole.
He came and paid them a visit in his black-velvet coat.
'He is so rich and so accomplished,' the field-mouse told her,