The Yellow Fairy Book: Blockhead-Hans
Far away in the country lay an old manor-house where lived an old squire who had two sons.
They thought themselves so clever, that if they had known only half of what they did know, it would have been quite enough.
They both wanted to marry the King's daughter, for she had proclaimed that she would have for her husband the man who knew best how to choose his words.Both prepared for the wooing a whole week, which was the longest time allowed them; but, after all, it was quite long enough, for they both had preparatory knowledge, and everyone knows how useful that is.
One knew the whole Latin dictionary and also three years' issue of the daily paper of the town off by heart, so that he could repeat it all backwards or forwards as you pleased.
The other had worked at the laws of corporation, and knew by heart what every member of the corporation ought to know, so that he thought he could quite well speak on State matters and give his opinion.
He understood, besides this, how to embroider braces with roses and other flowers, and scrolls, for he was very ready with his fingers.
'I shall win the king's daughter!'
they both cried.Their old father gave each of them a fine horse; the one who knew the dictionary and the daily paper by heart had a black horse, while the other who was so clever at corporation law had a milk-white one.
Then they oiled the corners of their mouths so that they might be able to speak more fluently.
All the servants stood in the courtyard and saw them mount their steeds, and here by chance came the third brother; for the squire had three sons, but nobody counted him with his brothers, for he was not so learned as they were, and he was generally called 'Blockhead-Hans.
''Oh, oh!'
said Blockhead-Hans.
'Where are you off to?
You are in your Sunday-best clothes!
''We are going to Court, to woo the Princess!
Don't you knowwhat is known throughout all the country side?'
And they told him all about it.'Hurrah!
I'll go to!'
cried Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed at him and rode off.
'Dear father!'
cried Blockhead-Hans, 'I must have a horse too.
What a desire for marriage has seized me!
If she will have me, she WILL have me, and if she won't have me, I will have her.
''Stop that nonsense!'
said the old man.
'I will not give you a horse.
YOU can't speak; YOU don't know how to choose your words.
Your brothers!
Ah!
they are very different lads!
''Well,' said Blockhead-Hans, 'if I can't have a horse, I will take the goat which is mine; he can carry me!
'And he did so.
He sat astride on the goat, struck his heels into its side, and went rattling down the high-road like a hurricane.
'Hoppetty hop!
what a ride!'
Here I come!'
shouted Blockhead-Hans, singing so that the echoes were roused far and near.
But his brothers were riding slowly in front.
They were not speaking, but they were thinking over all the good things they were going to say, for everything had to be thought out.'Hullo!'
bawled Blockhead-Hans, 'here I am!
Just look what