The Yellow Fairy Book: The Witch in the Stone Boat
There were once a King and a Queen, and they had a son called Sigurd, who was very strong and active, and good-looking.
When the King came to be bowed down with the weight of years he spoke to his son, and said that now it was time for him to look out for a fitting match for himself, for he did not know how long he might last now, and he would like to see him married before he died.Sigurd was not averse to this, and asked his father where he thought it best to look for a wife.
The King answered that in a certain country there was a King who had a beautiful daughter, and he thought it would be most desirable if Sigurd could get her.
So the two parted, and Sigurd prepared for the journey, and went to where his father had directed him.He came to the King and asked his daughter's hand, which he readily granted him, but only on the condition that he should remain there as long as he could, for the King himself was not strong and not very able to govern his kingdom.
Sigurd accepted this condition, but added that he would have to get leave to go home again to his own country when he heard news of his father's death.
After that Sigurd married the Princess, and helped his father-in-law to govern the kingdom.
He and the Princess loved each other dearly, and after a year a son came to them, who was two years old when word came to Sigurd that his father was dead.
Sigurd now prepared to return home with his wife and child, and went on board ship to go by sea.They had sailed for several days, when the breeze suddenly fell, and there came a dead calm, at a time when they needed only one day's voyage to reach home.
Sigurd and his Queen were one day on deck, when most of the others on the ship had fallen asleep.
There they sat and talked for a while, and had their little son along with them.
After a time Sigurd became so heavy with sleep that he could no longer keep awake, so he went below and lay down, leaving the Queen alone on the deck, playing with her son.A good while after Sigurd had gone below the Queen saw something black on the sea, which seemed to be coming nearer.
As it approached she could make out that it was a boat, and could see the figure of some one sitting in it and rowing it.
At last the boat came alongside the ship, and now the Queen saw that it was a stone boat, out of which there came up on board the ship a fearfully ugly Witch.
The Queen was more frightened than words can describe, and could neither speak a word nor move from the place so as to awaken the King or the sailors.
The Witch came right up to the Queen, took the child from her and laid it on the deck; then she took the Queen, and stripped her of all her fine clothes, which she proceeded to put on herself, and looked then like a human being.
Last of all she took the Queen, put her into the boat, and said—'This spell I lay upon you, that you slacken not your course until you come to my brother in the Underworld.
'The Queen sat stunned and motionless, but the boat at once shot away from the ship with her, and before long she was out of sight.When the boat could no longer be seen the child began to cry, and though the Witch tried to quiet it she could not manage it; so she went below to where the King was sleeping with the child on her arm, and awakened him, scolding him for leaving them alone on deck, while he and all the crew were asleep.
It was great carelessness of him, she said, to leave no one to watch the ship with her.Sigurd was greatly surprised to hear his Queen scold him so much, for she had never said an angry word to him before; but he thought it was quite excusable in this case, and tried to quiet the child along with her, but it was no use.
Then he went and wakened the sailors, and bade them hoist the sails, for a breeze had sprung up and was blowing straight towards the harbour.They soon reached the land which Sigurd was to rule over, and found all the people sorrowful for the old King's death, but they became glad when they got Sigurd back to the Court, and made him King over them.The King's son, however, hardly ever stopped crying from the time he had been taken from his mother on the deck of the ship, although he had always been such a good child before, so that at last the King had to get a nurse for him—one of the maids of the