XVIII.
BEFORE this there was a king, and he wished to see his son with a wife before she should depart.
His son said he had better go for a wife; and he gave him half a hundred pounds to get her.
He went forward in to a hostelry to stay in it.
He went down to a chamber with a good fire in front of him; and when he had gotten meat, the man of the house went down to talk to him.
He told the man of the house the journey on which he was.
The man of the house told him he need not go further; that there was a little house opposite to his sleeping chamber that the man of the house had three fine daughters; and if he would stand in the window of his chamber in the morning, that he would see one after another coming to dress herself.
That they were all like each other, and that he could not distinguish one from the other, but that the eldest had a mole.
That many were going to ask for them, but that none got them, because whoever wished for one, must tell whether the one he liked best was younger or older; and if he made her out, that she would cost him a hundred pounds.
"I have but half a hundred," said the king's son.
"I will give thee another half hundred," said the man of the house, "if thou wilt pay me at the end of a day and a year; and if thou dost not pay me, a strip of skin shall come from the top of thy head to the sole of thy foot."
On the morrow when he rose he went to the window; he saw the girls coming to dress themselves; and after meat in the morning, he went over to the house of their father.
When he went in he was taken down to a chamber, and the man of the house went down to talk to him.
He told the journey on which he was, and he said to him, "They tell me that thou hast three fine daughters."
"I have that same, but I am afraid that it is not thou who wilt buy them."
"I will give them a trial, at all events," said he.
The three were sent down before him, and it was said to him "Whether she, the one he liked best, was the elder or younger."
He thought he would take the one with the mole, because he knew she was the eldest.
She then was much pleased that it was she herself he was for.
He asked her father how much she would be, and her father said she would be a hundred pounds.
He bought her and he took her to the house, of his father, and the married.
Shortly after they married his father departed.
A day or two after the death of the old king the young king was out hunting; he saw a great ship coming in to the strand; lie went down to ask the captain what be had on board.
The captain said,