XXXVI.
FIONN, the son of Cumal.
FIONN MAC CUMHAIL was in Eirinn, and the king of Lochlann in Lochlann.
The king of Lochlann sent MAGHACH COLGAR to Fionn to be taught.
The king of the SEALG sent to him his own son, whom they called INNSRIDH MACRIGH NAN SEALG.
They were of age, six years (and) ten.
Then they were in Erin with Fionn, and Fionn taught Maghach, son of the king of Lochlann, every learning he had.
There came a message from the king of Lochlann, that he was in the sickness of death for leaving the world; and that the Maghach must go home to be ready for his crowning.
Maghach went away, and the chase failed with the FEINN, and they did not know what they should do.
Maghach wrote a letter to Fionn from Lochlann to Eirinn: "I heard that the chase failed with you in Eirinn.
I have burghs on sea, and I have burghs on shore: I have food for a day and a year in every burgh of these--the meat thou thinkest not of, and the drink thou thinkest not of; come thou hither thyself and thy set of FIANTACHAN.
The keep of a day and a year is on thy head."
Fionn got the letter, and he opened it: "He is pitiable who would not do a good thing in the beginning of youth; he might get a good share of it again in the beginning of his age.
Here is a letter came from my foster-son from Lochlann that he has burghs on sea and burghs on shore, food for a day and a year in every one of them--the drink that we can think of, and the drink that we do not think of; the meat we can think of, and the meat that we do not think of--and it is best for us to be going."
"Whom shall we leave," said FIACHERE MACFHINN (the trier son of Fionn) his son, "to keep the darlings and little sons of Eireann."
"I will stay," said FIACHERE MACFHINN.
"I will stay," said DIARMID O'DUIBHNE, his sister's son.
"I will stay," said INNSRIDH MACRIGH NAN SEALG, his foster-son.
"I will stay," said CATH CONAN MAC MHIC CON.
"We will stay now," said they--the four.
"Thou art going, my father," said Fiachere, "and it is as well for thee to stay; how then shall we get word how it befalls thee in Lochlainn?"
"I will strike the ORD FIANNT (hammer of Fiant) in Lochlainn, and it will be known by the blow I strike in Lochlainn, or in Eirinn, how we shall be."
Fionn and his company went, they reached Lochlainn.
Maghach Colgar, son of the king of Lochlainn, went before to meet them.
"Hail to thee, my foster father," said Maghach.
"Hail to thyself, my foster-son," said Fionn.
"There is the business I had with thee; I heard that the chase had failed in Eirinn, and it was not well with me to let you die without meat.
I have burghs on sea and burghs on shore, and food for a day and year in every one of them, and which kind wouldst thou rather choose?"
"It is on shore I used to always be, and it is not on sea; and I will take some on shore," said Fionn.
They went into one of them.
There was a door opposite to every day in the year on the house; every sort of drink and meat within it.
They sat on chairs; they caught every man hold of a fork and of a knife, They gave a glance from them, and what should they see in the "araich" (great half-ruined building), but not a hole open but frozen rime.
They gave themselves that lift to rise.
The chairs stuck to the earth.
They themselves stuck to the chairs.
Their hands stuck to the knives, and there was no way of rising out of that.
It was day about that Fiachaire MacFhinn and Innsridh MacRigh nan Sealg were going to keep the chase, and Diarmid O'Duibhne and Conan were going on the other day.
On their returning back, what should they hear but a blow of the hammer of Fionn being struck in Lochlainn.
"If he has wandered the universe and the world, my foster-father is in pledge of his body and soul."
Fiachaire MacFhinn and Innsridh MacRigh nan Sealg went from Eirinn, and they reached Lochlainn.
"Who is that without on the burgh?"
"I am," said Fiachaire MacFhinn and Innsridh MacRigh nan Sealg.
"Who is there on the place of combat?"
"There are two hundred score of the GREUGACHAIBH (Greeks) come out and great IALL at their head coming to seek my head to be his at his great meal to morrow."
Fiachaire MacFhinn and Innsridh MacRigh nan Sealg went and they reached the place of combat.
"Where are ye going? "
said Fiachaire MacFhinn.
"We are going to seek the head of Mhic Cumhail to be ours at our great meal to-morrow."
"It is often that man's head might be sought and be on my own breast at early morning."
"Close up," said Iall, "and leave way for the people."
"There is a small delay on that," said Fiachaire.
Fiachaire, son of Fhinn, pressed out on the one end of them.
Innsridh, son of the king of the Sealg, began in the other end, till the two glaves clashed against each other.
They returned, and they reached the burgh.
Co aig a bha 'n càth grannda A bha air an àth chomhrag                 An diugh?
"With whom was the hideous fight That was on the battle-place                    to-day?"
said Fionn.
"With me," said Fiachaire, "and with the son of the king of the Sealg."
"How was my foster-son off there?"
"Man upon man," said Fiachaire.
"And if he had not another man, he had lacked none."
"Over the field, to my foster-son," said Fionn; "and his bones but soft yet!
but mind the place of combat.
Yonder are three hundred score of the Greeks coming out seeking my head to be theirs at their great meal tomorrow."
Fiachaire MacFhinn, and Innsridh MacRigh nan Sealg went, and they reached the place of combat.
"Where are you going?"
said Fiachaire MacFhinn.
"Going to seek the head of Mhic Cumhail to be ours at our great meal to-morrow."
"It's often that very man's head might be sought, and be on my own breast at early morning."
"Close up and leave way for the people."
"There is still a small delay on that."
Fiachaire began in the one end of the company, and Innsridh MacRigh nan Sealg in the other, till the two glaves clashed on each other.
They returned to the burgh.
"Who is that?"
said Fionn.
"I am Fiachaire, thy son, and Innsridh, son of the king of the Sealg, thy foster son, With whom was the hideous fight That was on the battle place (battle ford)                    To-day.