XXXIII.
THERE was before now, a queen who was sick, and she had three daughters.
Said she to the one who was eldest, "Go to the well of true water, and bring to me a drink to heal me."
The daughter went, and she reached the well.
A LOSGANN (frog or toad) came up to ask her if she would wed him, if she should get a drink for her mother.
"I will not wed thee, hideous creature!
on any account," said she.
"Well then," said he, "thou shalt not get the water."
She went away home, and her mother sent away her sister that was nearest to her, to seek a drink of the water.
She reached the well; and the toad came up and asked her "if she would marry him if she should get the water."
"I wont marry thee, hideous creature!"
said she.
"Thou shalt not get the water, then," said he.
She went home, and her sister that was youngest went to seek the water.
When she reached the well the toad came up as he used, and asked her "if she would marry him if she should get the water."
"If I have no other way to get healing for my mother, I will marry thee," said she; and she got the water, and she healed her mother.
They had betaken themselves to rest in the night when the toad came to the door saying:-- "A CHAOMHAG, A CHAOMHAG, AN CUIMHNEACH LEAT AN GEALLADH BEAG A THUG THU AIG AN TOBAR DHOMH, A GHAOIL, A GHAOIL."
"Gentle one, gentle one, Rememberest thou The little pledge Thou gavest me Beside the well, My love, my love."
When he was ceaselessly saying this, the girl rose and took him in, and put him behind the door, and she went to bed; but she was not long laid down, when he began again saying, everlastingly:-- "A hàovaig, a hàovaig, An cuineach leat An geallug beag A hoog oo aig An tobar gaw, A géule, a géule."
Then she got up and she put him under a noggin; that kept him quiet a while; but she was not long laid down when he began again, saying -- "A hàovaig, a hàovaig, An cuineach leat An geallug beag A hoog oo aig An tobar gaw, A géule, a géule."
She rose again, and she made him a little bed at the fireside; but he was not pleased, and he began again saying, "A chaoimheag, a chaoimheag, an cuimhneach leat an gealladh beag a thug thu aig an tobar dhomb, a ghaoil, a ghaoil."
Then she got up and made him a bed beside her own bed; but he was without ceasing, saying,