XXXV.
THERE was an old king before now in Erin, 1 and a sister of his, whose name was MAOBH, had three sons.
The eldest of them was Ferghus, the middlemost Lagh an Laidh, and the youngest one Conall.
He thought he would make an heir of the eldest one, Ferghus.
He gave him the schooling of the son of a king and a "ridere," and when he was satisfied with school and learning he brought him home to the palace.
Now they were in the palace.
Said the king, "I have passed this year well; the end of the year is coming now, and trouble and care are coming on with it."
"What trouble or care is coming on thee?"
said the young man.
"The vassals of the country are coming to reckon with me to-day."
"Thou hast no need to be in trouble.
It is proclaimed that I am the young heir, and it is set down in papers and in letters in each end of the realm.
I will build a fine castle in front of the palace for thee.
I will get carpenters, and stonemasons, and smiths to build that castle."
"Is that thy thought, son of my sister?"
said the king.
"Thou hadst neither claim nor right to the realm unless I myself had chosen to give it to thee with my own free will.
Thou wilt not see thyself handling Erin till I go first under the mould."
"There will be a day of battle and combat before I let this go on," said the young man.
He went away, and he sailed to Alba.
A message was sent up to the king of Alba that the young king of Erin was come to Alba to see him.
He was taken up on the deadly points.
1 Meat was set in the place for eating; drink in the place for drinking; and music in the place for hearing; and they were plying the feast and the company.
"Oh!
young king of Erin," said the king of Alba, "it was not without the beginning of some matter that thou art come to Alba."
"I should not wish to let out the knowledge of my matter till I should first know whether I may get it."
"Anything I have thou gettest it, for if I were seeking help, perhaps I would go to thee to get it."
"There came a word with trouble between me and my mother's brother.
It was proclaimed out that I was king of Erin; and he said to me that I should have nothing to do with anything till a clod should first go on him.
I wish to stand my right, and to get help from thee."
"I will give thee that," said the king; "three hundred swift heroes, three hundred brave heroes, three hundred full heroes; and that is not bad helping."
"I am without a chief over them, and I am as ill off as I was before; but I have another small request, and if I might get it, I would wish to let it out."
"Anything I have that I can part from, thou shalt get it," said the king; "but the thing I have not, I cannot give it to thee.
Let out thy speech, and thou shalt have it."
"It is Boinne Breat, thy son, at their head."
"My torture to thee!
had I not promised him to thee, thou hadst not got him.
But there were not born in Alba, nor in Erin, nor in Sassun, nor in any one place (those) who would gain victory over my son if they keep to fair play.
If my son does not come back as be went, the word of an Eriannach is never again to be taken, for it is by treachery he will be overcome."
They went away on the morrow, and they sailed to the king of Sassun.
A message went up to the king of Sassun that the young king of Erin had come to the place.
The king of Sassun took out to meet him.
He was taken up on the deadly points; music was raised, and lament laid down in the palace of the king of Sassun; meat was set in the place for eating; drink in the place for drinking; music in the place of hearing; and they were plying the feast and the company with joy and pleasure of mind.
"Oh!
young king of Erin," said the king of Sassun, "it is not without the end of a matter that thou art come here."
"I got the schooling of the son of a king and a ridere.
My mother's brother took me home.
He began to speak about the vassals of the country and the people of the realm; that care and trouble were on him; and that he had rather the end of the year had not come at all.
Said I to him, 'I will build thee a palace, so that thou shalt have but to wash thy face, and stretch thy feet in thy shoes.'
Said he, 'My sister's son, thou hadst no right to the realm, and thou gettest it not till a clod goes on me, in spite of everything.'
Said I, 'There will be a day of battle and combat between thee and me, before the matter is so.'
I went away; I took my ship; I took a skipper with me; and I sailed to Alba.
I reached Alba, and I got three hundred swift heroes, three hundred brave heroes, and three hundred full heroes; now I am come to thee to see what help thou wilt give me."
"I will give thee as many more, and a hero at their head," said the king of Sassun.
They went away, and they sailed to Erin.
They went on shore on a crag in Erin, and the name of Carrig Fhearghuis is on that rock still.
He reached the king.
"Brother of my mother, art thou now ready?"
--"Well, then, Fhearghuis, though I said that, I thought thou wouldst not take anger; but I have not gathered my lot of people yet."
--"That is no answer for me.
Thou hast Erin under thy rule.
I am here with my men, and I have neither place, nor meat, nor drink for them."
"Oo!"
said the king, "the storehouses of Erin are open beneath thee, and I will go away and gather my people."
He went away.
He went all round Erin.
He came to a place which they called "An t' Iubhar " (Newry).
There was but one man in Iubhar, who was called Goibhlean Gobba (Goivlan Smith).
He thought to go in, for thirst was on him; and that he would quench his thirst, and breathe a while.
He went in.
There was within but the smith's daughter.
She brought him a chair in which he might sit.
He asked for a drink.
The smith's daughter did not know what she should do, for the smith had but one cow, which was called the Glas Ghoibhlean (Grey Goivlan), with the vessel he had for the milk of the cow; three times in the day it would go beneath the cow; three times in the day thirst would be on him; and he would drink the vessel each time, and unless the daughter had the vessel full she was not to get off.
She was afraid, when the king asked for a drink, that unless she had the vessel full her head would be taken off.
It was so that she thought the vessel should be set before the king at all hazards.
She brought down the vessel, and she set it before him.
He drank a draught; he took out the fourth part, and he left three quarters in it.
"I would rather you should take it out altogether than leave it.
My father has made an oath that unless I have the vessel full, I have but to die."
"Well, then," said the king, "it is a spell of my spells to leave the vessel as full as it was before."
He set the vessel on the board, he struck his palm on it, and he struck off as much as was above the milk, and the vessel was full; and before he went away, the girl was his own.
"Now, thou art going, oh king of Erin, and I am shamed; what wilt thou leave with me?"
"I would give thee a thousand of each hue, a thousand of each kind, a thousand of each creature."
"What should I do with that, for I wilt not find salt in Erin to salt them?"
"I would give thee glens and high moors to feed them from year to year."
"What should I do with that?
for if Fearghus should kill you, he will take it from me, unless I have it with writing, and a drop of blood to bind it."
"I am in haste this night, but go to-morrow to the camp to Croc Maol Nam Muc," said the king; and he left his blessing with her.
Her father came.
"Far from thee--far from thee be it, my daughter!