XL.
THERE was once a Scottish yeoman who had three sons.
When the youngest of them came to be of age to fellow a profession, he set apart three hundred marks for each of them.
The youngest son asked that his portion might be given to himself, as he was going away to seek his fortune.
He went to the great city of London.
He was for a time there, and what was he doing but learning to be a gentleman's servant?
He at last set about finding a master.
He heard that the chief magistrate (provost 1) of London wanted a servant.
He applied to him, they agreed, and he entered his service.
The chief magistrate was in the habit of going every day in the week to meet the Archbishop of London in a particular place.
The servant attended his master, for he always went out along with him.
When they had broken up their meeting on one occasion, they returned homewards, and the servant said to his master by the way,--   "That is a good brown horse of the bishop's," said he, "with your leave, master."
"Yes, my man," said the master, "he has the best horse in London."
"What think you," said the servant, "would be take for the horse, if he were to sell it?"
"Oh!
you fool," said his master, "I thought you were a sensible fellow; many a man has tried to buy that horse, and it has defied them as yet."
"I'll return and try," said he.
His master returned along with him to see what would happen.
This was on a Thursday.
The young man asked the bishop, would he sell the horse?
The bishop became amazed and angry, and said he did not expect that he could buy it.
"But what beast could you, or any man have," said the young man, "that might not be bought?"
"Senseless fellow," said the bishop; "how foolish you are I go away home, you shan't buy my horse."
"What will you wager," said the young man, "that I won't have the horse by this time to-morrow?"
"Is it my horse you mean?"
said the bishop.
"Yes, your horse," said the young man.
"What will you wager that I don't steal it?"
"I'll wager five hundred merks," said the bishop, "that you don't."
"Then," said the young man, "I have only one pound, but I'll wager that, and my head besides, that I do."
"Agreed," said the bishop.
"Observe," said the young man, "that I have wagered my head and the pound with you, and if I steal the horse he will be my own property."
"That he will, assuredly," said the chief magistrate.
"I agree to that," said the bishop.
They returned home that night.
"Poor fellow," said the chief magistrate to his servant by the way, "I am very well satisfied with you since I got you.
I am not willing to lose you now.
You are foolish.
The bishop will take care that neither you nor any other man will steal the horse.
He'll have him watched."
When night came, the young man started, and set to work; he went to the bishop's house.
What did he find out there, but that they had the horse in a room, and men along with it, who were busy eating and drinking.
He looked about him, and soon saw that he would require another clever fellow along with him.
In looking about, who does he find but one of the loose fellows about the town.
"If you go along with me for a little time," said he, I will give you something for your pains."
"I'll do that," said the other.
He set off, and at the first start both he and his man reached the hangman of the city.
"Can you tell me," said he to the hangman, "where I can get a dead man?"
"Yes," said the hangman, "there was a man hanged this very day, after midday."
"If you go and get him for me," said the young man, "I'll give you something for your pains."
The hangman agreed, and went away with him to where the body was.
"Do you know now," said the young man, "where I can get a long stout rope?"
"Yes," said the hangman, "the rope that hanged the man is here quite convenient; you'll get it."
They set off with the body, both himself and his man.