XLVIII.
THERE was once a young lad, and he went to seek a wife to Sgire mo Chealag; and he married a farmer's daughter, and her father had but herself.
And when the time of cutting the peats came on, they went to the peat hag, the four.
And the young wife was sent home to seek the food; and when she had gone in she saw the speckled filly's packsaddle over her head, and she began to cry, and to say to herself,-- "What should she do if the packsaddle should fall, and kill herself and all that were to follow."
When the people who were gathering the peats found that she was long without coming, they sent her mother away to see what was keeping her, and when the carlin arrived she found the bride crying, "That it should come to me!"
--Said she, "What came to thee?"
"Oh," said she, "when I came in I saw the speckled filly's packsaddle over my head, and what should I do if it should fall and kill myself and all that are to follow!"
The old woman struck her palms.
"It came to me this day!
If that should happen, what shouldst thou do, or I with thee!"
The men who were in the peat-hag were thinking it long that one of the women was not coming, for hunger had struck them.
So it was that the old man went home to see what was keeping the women, and when he went in it was so that he found the two crying, and beating their palms.
"O, uvon!"
said he, "what came upon you?"
"O!"
said the old woman, "when thy daughter came home, did she not see the speckled filly's packsaddle over her head, and what should she do if it should fall and kill herself and all that were to follow!"
"It came upon me!"
said the old man, as he struck his palms, "If that should happen!"
The young man came at the mouth of night, full of hunger, and he found a leash crying together.
"Oovoo!"
said he, "what came upon you?"
and when the old man told him; "But," said he, "the packsaddle did not fall."
When he took his meat he went to lie down; and in the morning he said, "My foot shall not stay till I see other three as silly as ye."
Then he went through Sgire mo Chealag, and he went into a house in it, and there was no man within but a leash of women, and they were spinning on five wheels.
"I myself will not believe," said he, "that it is of the people of this place that you are."
"Well, then," said they, "it is not.
We ourselves will not believe that it is of the people of the place that thou art thyself."
"It is not," said he.
"Weel," said they, "the men that there are in this place are so silly, that we can make them believe anything that we please ourselves."
"Weel," said he, "I have here a gold ring, and I will give it to the one amongst you who will best make her husband believe."
The first one that came home of the men, his wife said to him, "Thou art sick."
"Am I," said he.
"Oh thou art," said she, "put off thee thy lot of clothes, and be going to lie down."
He did this, and when he was in the bed she said to him, "Thou art now dead."
"Oh, am I?"
said he.
"Thou art," said she, "shut thine eyes and stir not hand or foot."
And now he was dead.
Then there came the second one home, and his wife said to him, "It is not thou."
"O, is it not me?"
said he.
And he went away and betook himself to the wood.
Then here came the third to his own house, and he and his wife went to lie down, and a summons went out on the morrow for the burial of the dead man, but this wife would not let her husband get up to go there.
When they saw the funeral going past the window, she told him to be rising.
He arose in great haste, and he was seeking his set of lost clothes, and his wife said to him that his clothes were about him.
"Are they?"
said he.
"They are," said she: "Haste thee that thou mayest catch them."
Here, then, he went, running hard.
And when the funeral company saw the man who was stripped coming, they thought it was a man who was out of his reason, and they themselves fled away, and they left the funeral.
And the naked man stood at the end of the dead-chest.
And there came down a man out of the wood, and he said to the man who was naked,-- "Dost thou know me?"
"Not I," said he, "I do not know thee."
"Oh, thou dost not!
if I were TOMAS My own wife would know me."
"But why," said he, "art thou naked?"
"Am I naked?
If I am, my wife told me that the clothes were about me."
"It was my wife that said to me that I myself was dead," said the man in the chest.
And when the men heard the dead speaking, they took their soles out (of that), and the wives came and they took them home, and it was the wife of the man who was dead that got the ring.
And then he saw three as silly as the three he left at home, and returned home.
And then he saw a boat going to fish, and there were twelve men counted going into the boat, and when she came to land, there was within her but eleven men, and there was no knowing which one was lost, for the one who was counting was not counting himself at all.
And he was beholding this.
"What reward would you give me if I should find you the man that is lost by you?"
"Thou shalt get any reward if thou wilt find the man," said they.
"Sit there," said he, "beside each other;" and he seized a rung of a stick, and he struck the first one a sharp stroke.
"Mind thou that thou wert in her" (the boat).
He kept on striking them, till he had roused twelve men, and made them bleed on the grass.
And though they were pounded and wounded, it was no matter, they were pleased, because the man who was lost was found, and after the payment they made a feast for the one who had found the man who was lost.
The tenants of Sgire mo Chealag had a loch on which they used to put fish, and so it was that they needs must drain the loch, to get fresh fish for the feast; and when the loch was drained, there was not a single fish found on the loch but one great eel.
Then they said,-- "This is the monster that ate our fish."
Then they caught her, and they went away with her to drown her in the sea.
And when he saw this he went home; and on the way he saw four men putting a cow up to the top of a house that she might eat the grass that was growing on the house-top.
Then he saw that the people of Sgire mo Chealag were men without intelligence; but said he, "What reward will you give me, and I will bring the grass down?"
He went and he cut the grass, and he gave it to the cow, and went on before him.
Then he saw a man coming with a cow in a cart, and the people of the town had found out that the man had stolen the cow, and that MOD a court should be held upon him, and so they did; and the justice they did was to put the horse to death for carrying the cow.
And to shew you that this tale is true, it was this that made Iain Lom the bard say:   He was pensioned by Charles the Second as his bard, brought Montrose and the Campbells together at Inverlochy, and kept out of the fight, saying to the commander of the Irish auxiliaries, "If I fall, who will sing thy praises?"
He did sing the battle, in which the Campbells got the worst and the story goes, that Argyll was so nettled by the song that he offered a reward for his head.
He came himself and claimed the reward, and was courteously received, and conducted through the castle.
On entering a room hung round with black-cocks' heads, Argyll said, "Hast thou ever, John, seen so many black-cocks in one place?"
"I have seen them," said John.
"Where?"
"At Inmher Lochaidh."
"Ah!
John, John, thou wilt never cease gnawing the Campbells."
"The worst for me is that I cannot swallow them," said John.
This story, a short biography, and a selection from the poems of Iain Lom, will be found in John Mackenzie's "Beauties of Gaelic Poetry," 1841 (Glasgow: MacGregor, Polson, & Co., 75 Argyll Street), a work which deserves to be better known.
The verse quoted from memory by John Campbell, is in a song dedicated to the Macdugalds, and is this:-- "Cleas na binne nach mairean Bha 'n sgire Cille-ma- Cheallaig ’Nuair a dhit iad an gearran 'sa mhòd;" and the story told in the note is, that some women, as judges, doomed a horse to be hanged.
The thief who stole him first got off, because it was his first offence; the horse went back to the house of the thief, because he was the better master, and was condemned for stealing himself the second time.
There is an ingenuity in this unreasonable decision, which proves the inventor of that story to be no fool.
The story had passed into a saving long ago:-- CHA TUGADH AN CILLE-MA-CHEALLAIG BREATH BU CHLAOINE.
Part of this story, then, has a Gaelic pedigree of about 200 years.
Part of it is nearly the same as the beginning of No.
20, and is like "Die kluge Else" in German, which has a German pedigree in Grimm's third volume, which dates from 1588.
The story belongs to the same class as an old English rhyme, of which a version is given in Old Nurse's book, by C. Bennet, 1857.
"There was a little woman As I've heard tell, And she went to market Her eggs for to sell," etc., etc.